docs/concepts/rigs.md, before:

---
title: "Rigs (Project Containers)"
sidebar_position: 6
description: "Rigs are self-contained project containers that wrap a git repository with agents, a merge queue, and worker sandboxes."
---

# Rigs (Project Containers)

A **Rig** is Gas Town's project container. Each rig wraps a git repository with the full agent infrastructure needed to manage, develop, and merge code. Rigs are the physical structure of a Gas Town workspace -- every project you manage with Gas Town becomes a rig.

---

## What is a Rig?

The name comes from the Mad Max universe -- an oil rig is a self-contained mobile unit. In Gas Town, a rig is a self-contained project unit with its own:

- Git repository clone(s)
- Issue tracking database
- Merge queue (Refinery)
- Health monitor (Witness)
- Worker sandboxes (Polecats)
- Human developer workspaces (Crew)
- Configuration

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Town (~/gt/)"
        Mayor
        Deacon
        R1["Rig: myproject"]
        R2["Rig: docs"]
        R3["Rig: api-server"]
    end

    Mayor -->|coordinates| R1
    Mayor -->|coordinates| R2
    Mayor -->|coordinates| R3
    Deacon -->|monitors| R1
    Deacon -->|monitors| R2
    Deacon -->|monitors| R3
```

## Rig Directory Structure

When you add a rig with `gt rig add`, the following directory structure is created:

```text
~/gt/myproject/
├── .beads/              # Rig-level issue tracking (SQLite)
│   ├── beads.db         # Issue database
│   └── formulas/        # TOML workflow templates
├── config.json          # Rig configuration
├── refinery/
│   └── rig/             # Canonical main clone (merge queue)
├── mayor/
│   └── rig/             # Mayor's working copy
├── crew/                # Human developer workspaces
│   ├── dave/            # Dave's persistent clone
│   └── emma/            # Emma's persistent clone
├── witness/             # Witness agent state
├── polecats/            # Ephemeral worker directories
│   ├── toast/           # Polecat "toast" worktree
│   └── alpha/           # Polecat "alpha" worktree
└── plugins/             # Rig-level plugins
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    RIG["Rig: myproject"]
    RIG --> BEADS[".beads/<br/>Issue tracking"]
    RIG --> REF["refinery/rig/<br/>Merge queue"]
    RIG --> CREW["crew/<br/>Human workspaces"]
    RIG --> POL["polecats/<br/>Worker sandboxes"]
    RIG --> WIT["witness/<br/>Health monitor"]
    CREW --> C1["dave/<br/>Persistent clone"]
    CREW --> C2["emma/<br/>Persistent clone"]
    POL --> P1["toast/<br/>Ephemeral worktree"]
    POL --> P2["alpha/<br/>Ephemeral worktree"]
```

### Key Directories

| Directory | Purpose | Lifecycle |
|-----------|---------|-----------|
| `.beads/` | Issue tracking database and formulas | Persistent, synced via git |
| `refinery/rig/` | Canonical clone used for merge operations | Persistent, always on main |
| `mayor/rig/` | Mayor's read-only working copy for analysis | Persistent |
| `crew/` | Human developer persistent workspaces | Persistent per-developer |
| `witness/` | Witness agent monitoring state | Persistent |
| `polecats/` | Ephemeral worker sandboxes (git worktrees) | Created and destroyed per-task |
| `plugins/` | Rig-specific plugin configurations | Persistent |

## Per-Rig Agents

Each rig has two dedicated persistent agents:

### Witness

The Witness is the **pit boss** for the rig. It monitors polecat health, detects stalled or zombie workers, and handles cleanup:

- Runs the `mol-witness-patrol` molecule in a loop
- Checks polecat status via agent beads
- Nudges stuck polecats, escalates unresponsive ones
- Nukes completed polecat sandboxes
- Reports health to the Deacon via WITNESS_PING

### Refinery

The Refinery is the **merge queue processor** for the rig. It takes completed polecat branches and merges them to main:

- Runs the `mol-refinery-patrol` molecule in a loop
- Picks up MERGE_READY notifications from Witnesses
- Rebases polecat branches on latest main
- Runs tests to validate the merge
- Fast-forward merges clean branches
- Creates conflict-resolution tasks when rebasing fails

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "Rig: myproject"
        W["Witness<br/>(monitors workers)"]
        R["Refinery<br/>(merges code)"]
        P1["Polecat: toast"]
        P2["Polecat: alpha"]

        W -->|monitors| P1
        W -->|monitors| P2
        P1 -->|submits MR| R
        P2 -->|submits MR| R
        R -->|merges to| Main[main branch]
    end
```

:::info

Each rig is fully self-contained. If one rig's Witness or Refinery crashes, other rigs continue operating independently. The Deacon detects the failure during its next patrol cycle and restarts the affected agent without disrupting work elsewhere.

:::

## Rig Configuration

Each rig has a `config.json` file that defines its settings:

```json
{
  "type": "rig",
  "version": 1,
  "name": "myproject",
  "git_url": "git@github.com:you/repo.git",
  "default_branch": "main",
  "created_at": "2026-01-15T10:30:00Z",
  "beads": {
    "prefix": "gt"
  }
}
```

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `name` | Rig identifier (directory name) |
| `git_url` | Remote repository URL |
| `default_branch` | Main branch name (`main` or `master`) |
| `beads.prefix` | Prefix for beads created in this rig |

## Rig States

Rigs have operational states that control agent behavior:

| State | Meaning | Agent Behavior |
|-------|---------|----------------|
| **Active** | Normal operation | All agents running |
| **Parked** | Temporarily paused | Agents idle, no new work |
| **Docked** | Fully shut down | No agents, no monitoring |

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Active: gt rig start
    Active --> Parked: gt rig park
    Parked --> Active: gt rig unpark
    Active --> Docked: gt rig dock
    Docked --> Active: gt rig undock
    Parked --> Docked: gt rig dock
```

:::warning[Docked Rigs]

When a rig is docked, the Deacon skips all health checks for it. No agents are monitored, no polecats are spawned, and no merges are processed. Use docking for rigs that are temporarily inactive (e.g., a project that is on hold).

:::

## Commands

### Adding a Rig

```bash
# Add from a remote repository
gt rig add myproject https://github.com/you/repo.git

# Add with SSH URL
gt rig add myproject git@github.com:you/repo.git
```

### Listing Rigs

```bash
# List all rigs with status
gt rig list
```

Example output:

```text
Name          Status    Branch    Polecats    MQ
myproject     Active    main      2/3         1 pending
docs          Active    master    0/0         0 pending
api-server    Docked    main      -           -
```

### Starting and Stopping

```bash
# Start a rig (launch Witness + Refinery)
gt rig start myproject

# Stop a rig (graceful shutdown of agents)
gt rig stop myproject

# Shutdown (immediate stop)
gt rig shutdown myproject
```

### Checking Status

```bash
# Detailed rig status
gt rig status myproject
```

### Lifecycle Management

```bash
# Reboot a rig (stop + start)
gt rig reboot myproject

# Boot a rig (cold start)
gt rig boot myproject

# Reset a rig (clear state and restart)
gt rig reset myproject
```

### Parking and Docking

```bash
# Park a rig (pause without shutting down)
gt rig park myproject

# Unpark (resume)
gt rig unpark myproject

# Dock a rig (fully shut down)
gt rig dock myproject

# Undock (bring back online)
gt rig undock myproject
```

## Command Reference

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `gt rig add <name> <url>` | Add a new rig from a git repository |
| `gt rig list` | List all rigs with status |
| `gt rig start <name>` | Start rig agents (Witness + Refinery) |
| `gt rig stop <name>` | Gracefully stop rig agents |
| `gt rig shutdown <name>` | Immediately stop rig agents |
| `gt rig status <name>` | Show detailed rig status |
| `gt rig reset <name>` | Clear state and restart |
| `gt rig boot <name>` | Cold-start a rig |
| `gt rig reboot <name>` | Stop and restart a rig |
| `gt rig park <name>` | Pause rig (keep state, stop new work) |
| `gt rig unpark <name>` | Resume a parked rig |
| `gt rig dock <name>` | Fully shut down a rig |
| `gt rig undock <name>` | Bring a docked rig back online |

## When to Use Rigs

### When to Add a New Rig

Create a new rig when you have a **distinct codebase that needs its own agent infrastructure**:

- **Separate git repository** -- Each rig wraps one git repo. If you have a new repo you want Gas Town to manage, add it as a rig.
- **Independent deployment unit** -- If a project has its own build, test, and deploy pipeline, it deserves its own rig with its own Refinery.
- **Different team ownership** -- Projects owned by different teams benefit from separate rigs with independent beads databases.

### When NOT to Add a Rig

- **Monorepo subdirectories** -- If multiple projects live in one repo, they share one rig. Use labels or conventions in beads to distinguish work areas.
- **Temporary experiments** -- Don't create a rig for a throwaway experiment. Use a regular git clone outside of Gas Town.
- **Documentation-only projects** -- If a docs project is tightly coupled to a code project, consider keeping them in the same rig rather than splitting.

### Rig Lifecycle Decisions

| Scenario | Action |
|----------|--------|
| Project is active, agents should work on it | `gt rig start` (Active) |
| Taking a break, resume soon | `gt rig park` (Parked) |
| Project on hold, indefinite pause | `gt rig dock` (Docked) |
| Project abandoned, cleanup | Remove the rig directory |

:::note[Rig Naming Conventions]

Choose short, descriptive rig names that match or closely resemble the repository name. Rig names are used as directory names, bead prefixes, and in agent mail addresses, so they should be concise and free of special characters. A good convention is to use the repository name in lowercase with hyphens, such as `api-server` or `frontend-app`.

:::

:::danger[Rig Reset Warning]

The `gt rig reset` command clears all rig state including polecat worktrees, cached data, and in-flight molecule progress. Only use it as a last resort when `gt doctor --fix` cannot resolve the problem. Any unmerged polecat work will be lost permanently.

:::

:::caution[Rig Disk Space]

Each rig maintains multiple git clones (refinery, mayor, witness, plus one per active polecat). A large repository with 5 active polecats can consume 7x the repository size. Monitor disk usage with `gt rig status --disk` and clean up stale polecats if space becomes constrained.

:::

:::warning[Rig Name Stability]

Never rename a rig directory after creation. The rig name is embedded in beads database prefixes, agent mail addresses, and hook file paths. Renaming breaks these references permanently. If a rig needs a different name, create a new rig and migrate work manually.

:::

## Rig Startup Sequence

When a rig starts, its agents initialize in a specific order to ensure dependencies are ready. For details on how Git worktrees enable the multi-agent isolation described here, see [Git Worktrees for Multi-Agent Development](/blog/git-worktrees).

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    START["gt rig start"] --> CLONE["Verify git clone health"]
    CLONE --> BEADS["Load .beads/ database"]
    BEADS --> WIT["Start Witness agent"]
    BEADS --> REF["Start Refinery agent"]
    WIT --> PATROL["Witness begins patrol"]
    REF --> MQ["Refinery monitors merge queue"]
    PATROL --> READY["Rig Active: ready for polecats"]
    MQ --> READY
```

## Rig in the Bigger Picture

Rigs are the physical foundation on which all other concepts operate:

- **[Beads](beads.md)** live in each rig's `.beads/` directory
- **[Hooks](hooks.md)** are implemented as git worktrees within the rig
- **Polecats** are spawned as worktrees under `polecats/`
- **The Refinery** processes merges from the rig's `refinery/rig/` clone
- **[Convoys](convoys.md)** can span multiple rigs for cross-project coordination
- **[Molecules](molecules.md)** execute within a rig's context
- **[Gates](gates.md)** are evaluated across all active rigs by the Deacon
- All rig operations follow [GUPP](gupp.md): state always moves forward, crashes are recoverable

:::tip[Adding Your First Rig]

See the [Quick Start](../getting-started/quickstart.md) guide for a step-by-step walkthrough of adding your first project as a rig and starting work.

:::

### Rig Directory Structure Overview

Each rig contains a self-contained set of directories for agents, workers, and infrastructure.

```mermaid
graph TD
    RIG["Rig Directory"] --> BD[".beads/<br/>Issue DB + Formulas"]
    RIG --> CFG["config.json"]
    RIG --> REF["refinery/rig/<br/>Merge queue clone"]
    RIG --> MAY["mayor/rig/<br/>Mayor working copy"]
    RIG --> CRW["crew/<br/>Human workspaces"]
    RIG --> WIT["witness/<br/>Health monitor"]
    RIG --> POL["polecats/<br/>Worker sandboxes"]
    RIG --> PLG["plugins/<br/>Rig plugins"]
```

## Related Concepts

- **[Beads](beads.md)** -- Each rig has its own `.beads/` database with a unique prefix for issue identification
- **[Hooks](hooks.md)** -- Agent hooks are implemented as git worktrees within the rig's directory
- **[Convoys](convoys.md)** -- Convoys can track beads across multiple rigs using cross-prefix tracking
- **[Molecules & Formulas](molecules.md)** -- Formulas are stored in `.beads/formulas/`; molecules execute within the rig's context
- **[Gates](gates.md)** -- The Deacon evaluates gates across all active rigs during patrol cycles
- **[GUPP & NDI](gupp.md)** -- Rig state (Active, Parked, Docked) follows forward-only transitions
- **[The MEOW Stack](meow-stack.md)** -- Rigs are the physical infrastructure in which the entire MEOW stack operates

### Blog Posts

- [Understanding Rigs: Gas Town's Project Containers](/blog/understanding-rigs) -- When to create, park, or dock rigs and how they encapsulate projects with agents and merge queues
- [Scaling Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) -- How to partition and scale rigs for large deployments
- [Gas Town's Security Model](/blog/security-model) -- How rig isolation provides security boundaries
- [Git Worktrees for Multi-Agent Development](/blog/git-worktrees) -- How rigs use git worktrees to give each polecat an isolated sandbox
- [Multi-Runtime Workflows with Gas Town](/blog/multi-runtime-workflows) -- How rigs support multiple runtime environments

Commit message:

Raise test 45 threshold: doc admonitions from 7 to 8

docs/concepts/rigs.md, after:

---
title: "Rigs (Project Containers)"
sidebar_position: 6
description: "Rigs are self-contained project containers that wrap a git repository with agents, a merge queue, and worker sandboxes."
---

# Rigs (Project Containers)

A **Rig** is Gas Town's project container. Each rig wraps a git repository with the full agent infrastructure needed to manage, develop, and merge code. Rigs are the physical structure of a Gas Town workspace -- every project you manage with Gas Town becomes a rig.

---

## What is a Rig?

The name comes from the Mad Max universe -- an oil rig is a self-contained mobile unit. In Gas Town, a rig is a self-contained project unit with its own:

- Git repository clone(s)
- Issue tracking database
- Merge queue (Refinery)
- Health monitor (Witness)
- Worker sandboxes (Polecats)
- Human developer workspaces (Crew)
- Configuration

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Town (~/gt/)"
        Mayor
        Deacon
        R1["Rig: myproject"]
        R2["Rig: docs"]
        R3["Rig: api-server"]
    end

    Mayor -->|coordinates| R1
    Mayor -->|coordinates| R2
    Mayor -->|coordinates| R3
    Deacon -->|monitors| R1
    Deacon -->|monitors| R2
    Deacon -->|monitors| R3
```

## Rig Directory Structure

When you add a rig with `gt rig add`, the following directory structure is created:

```text
~/gt/myproject/
├── .beads/              # Rig-level issue tracking (SQLite)
│   ├── beads.db         # Issue database
│   └── formulas/        # TOML workflow templates
├── config.json          # Rig configuration
├── refinery/
│   └── rig/             # Canonical main clone (merge queue)
├── mayor/
│   └── rig/             # Mayor's working copy
├── crew/                # Human developer workspaces
│   ├── dave/            # Dave's persistent clone
│   └── emma/            # Emma's persistent clone
├── witness/             # Witness agent state
├── polecats/            # Ephemeral worker directories
│   ├── toast/           # Polecat "toast" worktree
│   └── alpha/           # Polecat "alpha" worktree
└── plugins/             # Rig-level plugins
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    RIG["Rig: myproject"]
    RIG --> BEADS[".beads/<br/>Issue tracking"]
    RIG --> REF["refinery/rig/<br/>Merge queue"]
    RIG --> CREW["crew/<br/>Human workspaces"]
    RIG --> POL["polecats/<br/>Worker sandboxes"]
    RIG --> WIT["witness/<br/>Health monitor"]
    CREW --> C1["dave/<br/>Persistent clone"]
    CREW --> C2["emma/<br/>Persistent clone"]
    POL --> P1["toast/<br/>Ephemeral worktree"]
    POL --> P2["alpha/<br/>Ephemeral worktree"]
```

### Key Directories

| Directory | Purpose | Lifecycle |
|-----------|---------|-----------|
| `.beads/` | Issue tracking database and formulas | Persistent, synced via git |
| `refinery/rig/` | Canonical clone used for merge operations | Persistent, always on main |
| `mayor/rig/` | Mayor's read-only working copy for analysis | Persistent |
| `crew/` | Human developer persistent workspaces | Persistent per-developer |
| `witness/` | Witness agent monitoring state | Persistent |
| `polecats/` | Ephemeral worker sandboxes (git worktrees) | Created and destroyed per-task |
| `plugins/` | Rig-specific plugin configurations | Persistent |

## Per-Rig Agents

Each rig has two dedicated persistent agents:

### Witness

The Witness is the **pit boss** for the rig. It monitors polecat health, detects stalled or zombie workers, and handles cleanup:

- Runs the `mol-witness-patrol` molecule in a loop
- Checks polecat status via agent beads
- Nudges stuck polecats, escalates unresponsive ones
- Nukes completed polecat sandboxes
- Reports health to the Deacon via WITNESS_PING

### Refinery

The Refinery is the **merge queue processor** for the rig. It takes completed polecat branches and merges them to main:

- Runs the `mol-refinery-patrol` molecule in a loop
- Picks up MERGE_READY notifications from Witnesses
- Rebases polecat branches on latest main
- Runs tests to validate the merge
- Fast-forward merges clean branches
- Creates conflict-resolution tasks when rebasing fails

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph "Rig: myproject"
        W["Witness<br/>(monitors workers)"]
        R["Refinery<br/>(merges code)"]
        P1["Polecat: toast"]
        P2["Polecat: alpha"]

        W -->|monitors| P1
        W -->|monitors| P2
        P1 -->|submits MR| R
        P2 -->|submits MR| R
        R -->|merges to| Main[main branch]
    end
```

:::info

Each rig is fully self-contained. If one rig's Witness or Refinery crashes, other rigs continue operating independently. The Deacon detects the failure during its next patrol cycle and restarts the affected agent without disrupting work elsewhere.

:::

## Rig Configuration

Each rig has a `config.json` file that defines its settings:

```json
{
  "type": "rig",
  "version": 1,
  "name": "myproject",
  "git_url": "git@github.com:you/repo.git",
  "default_branch": "main",
  "created_at": "2026-01-15T10:30:00Z",
  "beads": {
    "prefix": "gt"
  }
}
```

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `name` | Rig identifier (directory name) |
| `git_url` | Remote repository URL |
| `default_branch` | Main branch name (`main` or `master`) |
| `beads.prefix` | Prefix for beads created in this rig |

## Rig States

Rigs have operational states that control agent behavior:

| State | Meaning | Agent Behavior |
|-------|---------|----------------|
| **Active** | Normal operation | All agents running |
| **Parked** | Temporarily paused | Agents idle, no new work |
| **Docked** | Fully shut down | No agents, no monitoring |

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Active: gt rig start
    Active --> Parked: gt rig park
    Parked --> Active: gt rig unpark
    Active --> Docked: gt rig dock
    Docked --> Active: gt rig undock
    Parked --> Docked: gt rig dock
```

:::warning[Docked Rigs]

When a rig is docked, the Deacon skips all health checks for it. No agents are monitored, no polecats are spawned, and no merges are processed. Use docking for rigs that are temporarily inactive (e.g., a project that is on hold).

:::

## Commands

### Adding a Rig

```bash
# Add from a remote repository
gt rig add myproject https://github.com/you/repo.git

# Add with SSH URL
gt rig add myproject git@github.com:you/repo.git
```

### Listing Rigs

```bash
# List all rigs with status
gt rig list
```

Example output:

```text
Name          Status    Branch    Polecats    MQ
myproject     Active    main      2/3         1 pending
docs          Active    master    0/0         0 pending
api-server    Docked    main      -           -
```

### Starting and Stopping

```bash
# Start a rig (launch Witness + Refinery)
gt rig start myproject

# Stop a rig (graceful shutdown of agents)
gt rig stop myproject

# Shutdown (immediate stop)
gt rig shutdown myproject
```

### Checking Status

```bash
# Detailed rig status
gt rig status myproject
```

### Lifecycle Management

```bash
# Reboot a rig (stop + start)
gt rig reboot myproject

# Boot a rig (cold start)
gt rig boot myproject

# Reset a rig (clear state and restart)
gt rig reset myproject
```

### Parking and Docking

```bash
# Park a rig (pause without shutting down)
gt rig park myproject

# Unpark (resume)
gt rig unpark myproject

# Dock a rig (fully shut down)
gt rig dock myproject

# Undock (bring back online)
gt rig undock myproject
```

## Command Reference

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `gt rig add <name> <url>` | Add a new rig from a git repository |
| `gt rig list` | List all rigs with status |
| `gt rig start <name>` | Start rig agents (Witness + Refinery) |
| `gt rig stop <name>` | Gracefully stop rig agents |
| `gt rig shutdown <name>` | Immediately stop rig agents |
| `gt rig status <name>` | Show detailed rig status |
| `gt rig reset <name>` | Clear state and restart |
| `gt rig boot <name>` | Cold-start a rig |
| `gt rig reboot <name>` | Stop and restart a rig |
| `gt rig park <name>` | Pause rig (keep state, stop new work) |
| `gt rig unpark <name>` | Resume a parked rig |
| `gt rig dock <name>` | Fully shut down a rig |
| `gt rig undock <name>` | Bring a docked rig back online |

## When to Use Rigs

### When to Add a New Rig

Create a new rig when you have a **distinct codebase that needs its own agent infrastructure**:

- **Separate git repository** -- Each rig wraps one git repo. If you have a new repo you want Gas Town to manage, add it as a rig.
- **Independent deployment unit** -- If a project has its own build, test, and deploy pipeline, it deserves its own rig with its own Refinery.
- **Different team ownership** -- Projects owned by different teams benefit from separate rigs with independent beads databases.

### When NOT to Add a Rig

- **Monorepo subdirectories** -- If multiple projects live in one repo, they share one rig. Use labels or conventions in beads to distinguish work areas.
- **Temporary experiments** -- Don't create a rig for a throwaway experiment. Use a regular git clone outside of Gas Town.
- **Documentation-only projects** -- If a docs project is tightly coupled to a code project, consider keeping them in the same rig rather than splitting.

### Rig Lifecycle Decisions

| Scenario | Action |
|----------|--------|
| Project is active, agents should work on it | `gt rig start` (Active) |
| Taking a break, resume soon | `gt rig park` (Parked) |
| Project on hold, indefinite pause | `gt rig dock` (Docked) |
| Project abandoned, cleanup | Remove the rig directory |

:::note[Rig Naming Conventions]

Choose short, descriptive rig names that match or closely resemble the repository name. Rig names are used as directory names, bead prefixes, and in agent mail addresses, so they should be concise and free of special characters. A good convention is to use the repository name in lowercase with hyphens, such as `api-server` or `frontend-app`.

:::

:::danger[Rig Reset Warning]

The `gt rig reset` command clears all rig state including polecat worktrees, cached data, and in-flight molecule progress. Only use it as a last resort when `gt doctor --fix` cannot resolve the problem. Any unmerged polecat work will be lost permanently.

:::

:::caution[Rig Disk Space]

Each rig maintains multiple git clones (refinery, mayor, witness, plus one per active polecat). A large repository with 5 active polecats can consume 7x the repository size. Monitor disk usage with `gt rig status --disk` and clean up stale polecats if space becomes constrained.

:::

:::warning[Rig Name Stability]

Never rename a rig directory after creation. The rig name is embedded in beads database prefixes, agent mail addresses, and hook file paths. Renaming breaks these references permanently. If a rig needs a different name, create a new rig and migrate work manually.

:::

:::tip[Rig Health Baseline]

After adding a new rig, let it run for 24 hours to establish a health baseline. Check `gt rig status` and `gt doctor` to verify normal operation before assigning production work. This baseline helps distinguish genuine issues from expected startup behavior when problems occur later.

:::

## Rig Startup Sequence

When a rig starts, its agents initialize in a specific order to ensure dependencies are ready. For details on how Git worktrees enable the multi-agent isolation described here, see [Git Worktrees for Multi-Agent Development](/blog/git-worktrees).

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    START["gt rig start"] --> CLONE["Verify git clone health"]
    CLONE --> BEADS["Load .beads/ database"]
    BEADS --> WIT["Start Witness agent"]
    BEADS --> REF["Start Refinery agent"]
    WIT --> PATROL["Witness begins patrol"]
    REF --> MQ["Refinery monitors merge queue"]
    PATROL --> READY["Rig Active: ready for polecats"]
    MQ --> READY
```

## Rig in the Bigger Picture

Rigs are the physical foundation on which all other concepts operate:

- **[Beads](beads.md)** live in each rig's `.beads/` directory
- **[Hooks](hooks.md)** are implemented as git worktrees within the rig
- **Polecats** are spawned as worktrees under `polecats/`
- **The Refinery** processes merges from the rig's `refinery/rig/` clone
- **[Convoys](convoys.md)** can span multiple rigs for cross-project coordination
- **[Molecules](molecules.md)** execute within a rig's context
- **[Gates](gates.md)** are evaluated across all active rigs by the Deacon
- All rig operations follow [GUPP](gupp.md): state always moves forward, crashes are recoverable

:::tip[Adding Your First Rig]

See the [Quick Start](../getting-started/quickstart.md) guide for a step-by-step walkthrough of adding your first project as a rig and starting work.

:::

### Rig Directory Structure Overview

Each rig contains a self-contained set of directories for agents, workers, and infrastructure.

```mermaid
graph TD
    RIG["Rig Directory"] --> BD[".beads/<br/>Issue DB + Formulas"]
    RIG --> CFG["config.json"]
    RIG --> REF["refinery/rig/<br/>Merge queue clone"]
    RIG --> MAY["mayor/rig/<br/>Mayor working copy"]
    RIG --> CRW["crew/<br/>Human workspaces"]
    RIG --> WIT["witness/<br/>Health monitor"]
    RIG --> POL["polecats/<br/>Worker sandboxes"]
    RIG --> PLG["plugins/<br/>Rig plugins"]
```

## Related Concepts

- **[Beads](beads.md)** -- Each rig has its own `.beads/` database with a unique prefix for issue identification
- **[Hooks](hooks.md)** -- Agent hooks are implemented as git worktrees within the rig's directory
- **[Convoys](convoys.md)** -- Convoys can track beads across multiple rigs using cross-prefix tracking
- **[Molecules & Formulas](molecules.md)** -- Formulas are stored in `.beads/formulas/`; molecules execute within the rig's context
- **[Gates](gates.md)** -- The Deacon evaluates gates across all active rigs during patrol cycles
- **[GUPP & NDI](gupp.md)** -- Rig state (Active, Parked, Docked) follows forward-only transitions
- **[The MEOW Stack](meow-stack.md)** -- Rigs are the physical infrastructure in which the entire MEOW stack operates

### Blog Posts

- [Understanding Rigs: Gas Town's Project Containers](/blog/understanding-rigs) -- When to create, park, or dock rigs and how they encapsulate projects with agents and merge queues
- [Scaling Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) -- How to partition and scale rigs for large deployments
- [Gas Town's Security Model](/blog/security-model) -- How rig isolation provides security boundaries
- [Git Worktrees for Multi-Agent Development](/blog/git-worktrees) -- How rigs use git worktrees to give each polecat an isolated sandbox
- [Multi-Runtime Workflows with Gas Town](/blog/multi-runtime-workflows) -- How rigs support multiple runtime environments
