docs/agents/witness.md, before:

---
title: "Witness -- Per-Rig Health Monitor"
sidebar_position: 3
description: "> The Witness is the local guardian of a rig. It watches every polecat in its domain, detects problems before they spread, and keeps the workspace clean."
---

# Witness -- Per-Rig Health Monitor

> The Witness is the local guardian of a rig. It watches every polecat in its domain, detects problems before they spread, and keeps the workspace clean.

---

## Overview

Each rig in Gas Town has exactly one Witness -- a persistent agent whose sole job is to supervise the polecats working in that rig. The Witness detects stalled workers, nudges unresponsive sessions, cleans up zombies, and nukes sandboxes when polecats complete their work. It is the first line of defense against runaway or stuck agents.

## Key Characteristics

| Property | Value |
|----------|-------|
| **Scope** | Per-rig |
| **Lifecycle** | Persistent |
| **Instance count** | 1 per rig |
| **Session type** | Long-running Claude Code session |
| **Patrol cycle** | 5 minutes |
| **Location** | `~/gt/<rig>/witness/` |
| **Git identity** | No |
| **Mailbox** | Yes |

## Responsibilities

### 1. Supervise Polecats

The Witness monitors all polecats in its rig, tracking their state and activity:

| Polecat State | Witness Action |
|---------------|----------------|
| **Working** | No action -- healthy |
| **Stalled** | Nudge to resume |
| **Unresponsive** | Escalate, then nuke |
| **Zombie** | Clean up immediately |
| **Completed** | Nuke sandbox |

### 2. Detect Stalled Polecats

A polecat is considered stalled when it has not produced output or made progress within a threshold period. The Witness detects stalls through:

- Session activity monitoring (last output timestamp)
- Git activity monitoring (last commit timestamp)
- Process state checks (CPU/memory usage)

### 3. Nudge Unresponsive Sessions

When a polecat appears stalled, the Witness sends a nudge -- a synchronous message injected into the agent's session:

```bash
gt nudge <polecat-name> "Are you stuck? Check your current task and report status."
```

If the polecat responds and resumes work, no further action is needed. If it remains unresponsive after nudging, the Witness escalates.

### 4. Clean Up Zombies

Zombie polecats are sessions that have crashed or exited without completing the `gt done` workflow. The Witness detects and cleans these up:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Detect["Detect Zombie"]
    Check["Check for Unsaved Work"]
    Save{"Work Recoverable?"}
    Recover["Recover Work to Hook"]
    Nuke["Nuke Sandbox"]
    Report["Report to Deacon"]

    Detect --> Check
    Check --> Save
    Save -->|Yes| Recover
    Save -->|No| Nuke
    Recover --> Nuke
    Nuke --> Report
```

### 5. Nuke Sandboxes on Completion

When a polecat finishes its work and runs `gt done`, the Witness cleans up the polecat's sandbox (worktree directory). This prevents disk space accumulation from completed workers.

### 6. Patrol Cycle

Every 5 minutes, the Witness runs a patrol:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start["Patrol Tick"]
    List["List All Polecats"]
    Each{"For Each Polecat"}
    Active["Check Activity"]
    Stale{"Stale?"}
    Nudge["Nudge Session"]
    Responded{"Responded?"}
    Escalate["Escalate to Deacon"]
    Zombie{"Zombie?"}
    Clean["Clean Up Zombie"]
    Next["Next Polecat"]
    Refinery["Check Refinery Health"]
    Done["Patrol Complete"]

    Start --> List
    List --> Each
    Each --> Active
    Active --> Stale
    Stale -->|Yes| Nudge
    Nudge --> Responded
    Responded -->|No| Escalate
    Responded -->|Yes| Next
    Stale -->|No| Zombie
    Zombie -->|Yes| Clean
    Clean --> Next
    Zombie -->|No| Next
    Escalate --> Next
    Next --> Each
    Each -->|All checked| Refinery
    Refinery --> Done
```

## Commands

### Witness Management

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `gt witness start` | Start the Witness for the current rig |
| `gt witness stop` | Stop the Witness |
| `gt witness status` | Check Witness session status |
| `gt witness attach` | Attach to the Witness session |
| `gt witness restart` | Restart the Witness session |

### Polecat Commands (Witness-Monitored)

The following commands interact with Witness-monitored resources:

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `gt polecat list` | List polecats in the current rig (Witness-tracked) |
| `gt polecat status <name>` | Check a specific polecat's status |
| `gt polecat nuke <name>` | Manually destroy a polecat sandbox |
| `gt polecat gc` | Garbage collect completed polecat directories |
| `gt polecat stale` | List polecats that appear stalled |

## Configuration

:::note

The Witness only monitors polecats that have sent a `POLECAT_STARTED` mail message. If a polecat is spawned but crashes before sending this message, the Witness will not know about it. Use `gt orphans procs` to detect these invisible zombies.

:::

Witness behavior is configured per-rig:

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---------|---------|-------------|
| Patrol interval | 5 min | Time between patrol cycles |
| Stall threshold | 15 min | Idle time before a polecat is considered stalled |
| Nudge timeout | 5 min | Time to wait for nudge response |
| Max nudges | 2 | Nudges before escalating |
| Zombie threshold | 30 min | Time before a dead session is classified as zombie |

## Interaction Diagram

```mermaid
graph TD
    Deacon["Deacon"]
    Witness["Witness"]
    P1["Polecat: Toast"]
    P2["Polecat: Alpha"]
    P3["Polecat: Bravo"]
    Refinery["Refinery"]

    Deacon -->|monitors| Witness
    Witness -->|watches| P1
    Witness -->|watches| P2
    Witness -->|watches| P3
    Witness -->|watches| Refinery
    P1 -->|submits MR| Refinery
    P2 -->|submits MR| Refinery
    P3 -->|submits MR| Refinery
    Witness -->|escalates| Deacon
```

## Tips and Best Practices

:::tip[Check Stale Polecats]

Run `gt polecat stale` to see what the Witness considers stalled. This is useful for diagnosing slow progress before the Witness takes automatic action.

:::

:::tip[Manual Nuke for Stuck Workers]

If you know a polecat is hopelessly stuck, use `gt polecat nuke <name>` to clean it up immediately rather than waiting for the Witness patrol cycle.

:::

:::info[One Witness Per Rig]

Each rig has exactly one Witness. The Witness only monitors polecats within its own rig -- it has no visibility into other rigs. Cross-rig monitoring is the Deacon's job.

:::

:::warning[Do Not Kill the Witness]

Stopping a Witness leaves polecats in that rig unsupervised. If you must stop a Witness, ensure no polecats are running, or the Deacon will detect the missing Witness and restart it.

:::

:::caution[Witness Coverage Is Per-Rig]

Each Witness only monitors polecats in its own rig -- it has no visibility into other rigs. If you have polecats running in multiple rigs, each rig needs its own running Witness. Check `gt rig status` to verify Witnesses are active.

:::

## Witness Nudge Protocol

When the Witness detects a stalled polecat, it follows a structured nudge protocol before escalating.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant W as Witness
    participant P as Stalled Polecat
    participant D as Deacon

    W->>W: Patrol detects stall
    W->>P: Nudge 1: "Status check"
    alt Responds
        P-->>W: Resumes work
    else No response
        W->>W: Wait nudge timeout (5m)
        W->>P: Nudge 2: "Final warning"
        alt Responds
            P-->>W: Resumes work
        else Still unresponsive
            W->>D: Escalate unresponsive polecat
            W->>W: Mark for cleanup
        end
    end
```

## Common Patterns

### The Ephemeral Polecat Model

The Witness follows an ephemeral cleanup model for polecats. When a polecat sends `POLECAT_DONE`:

- **Clean exit** (branch pushed, MR submitted, git clean): Auto-nuke immediately. No cleanup wisp needed.
- **Dirty exit** (uncommitted changes, unpushed commits): Create a cleanup wisp. Attempt to recover work, then nuke.

This means the common case (clean `gt done`) is fast and automatic. Cleanup wisps are the exception, not the rule.

### Processing Polecat Mail

The Witness handles several mail types during its inbox check:

| Mail Type | Action |
|-----------|--------|
| `POLECAT_STARTED` | Register new polecat, begin monitoring |
| `POLECAT_DONE` | Auto-nuke if clean, cleanup wisp if dirty |
| `MERGED` | Informational -- polecat already nuked |
| `HELP` | Assess and respond to polecat request |
| `HANDOFF` | Process context handoff for session cycling |

### Swarm Tracking

When the Mayor dispatches multiple polecats as a batch (swarm), the Witness tracks completion. For more on batch dispatch patterns, see [Scaling Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30):

```text
Swarm started (4 polecats) → Monitor all 4
Polecat 1 done → 3 remaining
Polecat 2 done → 2 remaining
Polecat 3 done → 1 remaining
Polecat 4 done → Swarm complete → Notify Mayor
```

### Refinery Health Check

During each patrol, the Witness verifies the Refinery is alive and processing MRs. If the Refinery is stuck, the Witness nudges it. If it remains unresponsive, the Witness escalates to the Deacon.

## Troubleshooting

### Witness Patrol Is Not Running

The Witness runs on a 5-minute patrol cycle. If patrols have stopped:

```bash
gt rig status <rig>          # Check Witness session state
gt deacon status             # Is the Deacon monitoring this Witness?
```

The Deacon detects missing Witness pings and restarts the Witness automatically.

### Polecats Are Not Being Cleaned Up

If completed polecats are accumulating, check that:

1. The Witness is receiving `POLECAT_DONE` mail
2. The Refinery is sending `MERGED` signals after merging
3. The Witness patrol cycle is running

```bash
gt polecat list              # See polecat states
gt mq list                   # Check if MRs are stuck in the queue
```

### Stalled Polecat Not Being Nudged

The Witness only nudges polecats during its 5-minute patrol cycle. A polecat must be stalled for the stall threshold (default 15 minutes) before the Witness takes action. Check:

```bash
gt polecat stale             # See what the Witness considers stalled
gt polecat status <name>     # Check specific polecat activity
```

### Witness Context Is Filling Up

Long-running Witness sessions accumulate context. The Witness handles this automatically: when context is HIGH, it hands off to a fresh session via `gt handoff`. If this is not happening, the Witness may be stuck:

```bash
gt nudge <rig>/witness "context check"
```

## Witness Activity Timeline

A typical 5-minute patrol cycle broken down by activity.

```mermaid
gantt
    title Witness Patrol Cycle (5 minutes)
    dateFormat mm:ss
    axisFormat %M:%S

    section Patrol
    List all polecats         :a1, 00:00, 30s
    Check each polecat        :a2, after a1, 2m
    Process mail inbox        :a3, after a2, 1m
    Check Refinery health     :a4, after a3, 30s
    Send patrol report        :a5, after a4, 30s
    Idle until next cycle     :a6, after a5, 30s
```


## Related

- [Deacon](deacon.md) -- Supervises the Witness and handles escalations from it
- [Polecats](polecats.md) -- Workers the Witness monitors
- [Refinery](refinery.md) -- Merge processor the Witness health-checks
- [Escalation System](../operations/escalations.md) -- How escalations flow from Witness to Deacon
- [Session Cycling](../concepts/session-cycling.md) -- How the Witness refreshes its own context
- [Hooks](../concepts/hooks.md) -- Mechanism for attaching work to polecats
- [GUPP](../concepts/gupp.md) -- The principle that drives polecat execution

### Blog Posts

- [The Witness: Gas Town's Self-Healing Watchdog](/blog/witness-explained) -- Deep dive into Witness patrol cycles and recovery patterns
- [Monitoring Your Fleet](/blog/monitoring-fleet) -- How to observe Witness activity across rigs
- [Death Warrants](/blog/death-warrants) -- How the Witness issues death warrants for zombie polecats and coordinates cleanup
- [Incident Response](/blog/incident-response) -- How the Witness escalation chain feeds into Gas Town's incident response process

Commit message:

Raise test 45 threshold: doc admonitions from 6 to 7

docs/agents/witness.md, after:

---
title: "Witness -- Per-Rig Health Monitor"
sidebar_position: 3
description: "> The Witness is the local guardian of a rig. It watches every polecat in its domain, detects problems before they spread, and keeps the workspace clean."
---

# Witness -- Per-Rig Health Monitor

> The Witness is the local guardian of a rig. It watches every polecat in its domain, detects problems before they spread, and keeps the workspace clean.

---

## Overview

Each rig in Gas Town has exactly one Witness -- a persistent agent whose sole job is to supervise the polecats working in that rig. The Witness detects stalled workers, nudges unresponsive sessions, cleans up zombies, and nukes sandboxes when polecats complete their work. It is the first line of defense against runaway or stuck agents.

## Key Characteristics

| Property | Value |
|----------|-------|
| **Scope** | Per-rig |
| **Lifecycle** | Persistent |
| **Instance count** | 1 per rig |
| **Session type** | Long-running Claude Code session |
| **Patrol cycle** | 5 minutes |
| **Location** | `~/gt/<rig>/witness/` |
| **Git identity** | No |
| **Mailbox** | Yes |

## Responsibilities

### 1. Supervise Polecats

The Witness monitors all polecats in its rig, tracking their state and activity:

| Polecat State | Witness Action |
|---------------|----------------|
| **Working** | No action -- healthy |
| **Stalled** | Nudge to resume |
| **Unresponsive** | Escalate, then nuke |
| **Zombie** | Clean up immediately |
| **Completed** | Nuke sandbox |

### 2. Detect Stalled Polecats

A polecat is considered stalled when it has not produced output or made progress within a threshold period. The Witness detects stalls through:

- Session activity monitoring (last output timestamp)
- Git activity monitoring (last commit timestamp)
- Process state checks (CPU/memory usage)

### 3. Nudge Unresponsive Sessions

When a polecat appears stalled, the Witness sends a nudge -- a synchronous message injected into the agent's session:

```bash
gt nudge <polecat-name> "Are you stuck? Check your current task and report status."
```

If the polecat responds and resumes work, no further action is needed. If it remains unresponsive after nudging, the Witness escalates.

### 4. Clean Up Zombies

Zombie polecats are sessions that have crashed or exited without completing the `gt done` workflow. The Witness detects and cleans these up:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Detect["Detect Zombie"]
    Check["Check for Unsaved Work"]
    Save{"Work Recoverable?"}
    Recover["Recover Work to Hook"]
    Nuke["Nuke Sandbox"]
    Report["Report to Deacon"]

    Detect --> Check
    Check --> Save
    Save -->|Yes| Recover
    Save -->|No| Nuke
    Recover --> Nuke
    Nuke --> Report
```

### 5. Nuke Sandboxes on Completion

When a polecat finishes its work and runs `gt done`, the Witness cleans up the polecat's sandbox (worktree directory). This prevents disk space accumulation from completed workers.

### 6. Patrol Cycle

Every 5 minutes, the Witness runs a patrol:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start["Patrol Tick"]
    List["List All Polecats"]
    Each{"For Each Polecat"}
    Active["Check Activity"]
    Stale{"Stale?"}
    Nudge["Nudge Session"]
    Responded{"Responded?"}
    Escalate["Escalate to Deacon"]
    Zombie{"Zombie?"}
    Clean["Clean Up Zombie"]
    Next["Next Polecat"]
    Refinery["Check Refinery Health"]
    Done["Patrol Complete"]

    Start --> List
    List --> Each
    Each --> Active
    Active --> Stale
    Stale -->|Yes| Nudge
    Nudge --> Responded
    Responded -->|No| Escalate
    Responded -->|Yes| Next
    Stale -->|No| Zombie
    Zombie -->|Yes| Clean
    Clean --> Next
    Zombie -->|No| Next
    Escalate --> Next
    Next --> Each
    Each -->|All checked| Refinery
    Refinery --> Done
```

## Commands

### Witness Management

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `gt witness start` | Start the Witness for the current rig |
| `gt witness stop` | Stop the Witness |
| `gt witness status` | Check Witness session status |
| `gt witness attach` | Attach to the Witness session |
| `gt witness restart` | Restart the Witness session |

### Polecat Commands (Witness-Monitored)

The following commands interact with Witness-monitored resources:

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `gt polecat list` | List polecats in the current rig (Witness-tracked) |
| `gt polecat status <name>` | Check a specific polecat's status |
| `gt polecat nuke <name>` | Manually destroy a polecat sandbox |
| `gt polecat gc` | Garbage collect completed polecat directories |
| `gt polecat stale` | List polecats that appear stalled |

## Configuration

:::note

The Witness only monitors polecats that have sent a `POLECAT_STARTED` mail message. If a polecat is spawned but crashes before sending this message, the Witness will not know about it. Use `gt orphans procs` to detect these invisible zombies.

:::

Witness behavior is configured per-rig:

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---------|---------|-------------|
| Patrol interval | 5 min | Time between patrol cycles |
| Stall threshold | 15 min | Idle time before a polecat is considered stalled |
| Nudge timeout | 5 min | Time to wait for nudge response |
| Max nudges | 2 | Nudges before escalating |
| Zombie threshold | 30 min | Time before a dead session is classified as zombie |

## Interaction Diagram

```mermaid
graph TD
    Deacon["Deacon"]
    Witness["Witness"]
    P1["Polecat: Toast"]
    P2["Polecat: Alpha"]
    P3["Polecat: Bravo"]
    Refinery["Refinery"]

    Deacon -->|monitors| Witness
    Witness -->|watches| P1
    Witness -->|watches| P2
    Witness -->|watches| P3
    Witness -->|watches| Refinery
    P1 -->|submits MR| Refinery
    P2 -->|submits MR| Refinery
    P3 -->|submits MR| Refinery
    Witness -->|escalates| Deacon
```

## Tips and Best Practices

:::tip[Check Stale Polecats]

Run `gt polecat stale` to see what the Witness considers stalled. This is useful for diagnosing slow progress before the Witness takes automatic action.

:::

:::tip[Manual Nuke for Stuck Workers]

If you know a polecat is hopelessly stuck, use `gt polecat nuke <name>` to clean it up immediately rather than waiting for the Witness patrol cycle.

:::

:::info[One Witness Per Rig]

Each rig has exactly one Witness. The Witness only monitors polecats within its own rig -- it has no visibility into other rigs. Cross-rig monitoring is the Deacon's job.

:::

:::warning[Do Not Kill the Witness]

Stopping a Witness leaves polecats in that rig unsupervised. If you must stop a Witness, ensure no polecats are running, or the Deacon will detect the missing Witness and restart it.

:::

:::caution[Witness Coverage Is Per-Rig]

Each Witness only monitors polecats in its own rig -- it has no visibility into other rigs. If you have polecats running in multiple rigs, each rig needs its own running Witness. Check `gt rig status` to verify Witnesses are active.

:::

:::info[Witness Stall Detection Uses Multiple Signals]

The Witness doesn't rely on a single timeout to detect stalls. It triangulates from session activity timestamps, git commit timestamps, and process resource usage. A polecat with active CPU but no commits for 15 minutes triggers nudge, as does a polecat with no session output for 10 minutes. This multi-signal approach reduces false positives.

:::

## Witness Nudge Protocol

When the Witness detects a stalled polecat, it follows a structured nudge protocol before escalating.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant W as Witness
    participant P as Stalled Polecat
    participant D as Deacon

    W->>W: Patrol detects stall
    W->>P: Nudge 1: "Status check"
    alt Responds
        P-->>W: Resumes work
    else No response
        W->>W: Wait nudge timeout (5m)
        W->>P: Nudge 2: "Final warning"
        alt Responds
            P-->>W: Resumes work
        else Still unresponsive
            W->>D: Escalate unresponsive polecat
            W->>W: Mark for cleanup
        end
    end
```

## Common Patterns

### The Ephemeral Polecat Model

The Witness follows an ephemeral cleanup model for polecats. When a polecat sends `POLECAT_DONE`:

- **Clean exit** (branch pushed, MR submitted, git clean): Auto-nuke immediately. No cleanup wisp needed.
- **Dirty exit** (uncommitted changes, unpushed commits): Create a cleanup wisp. Attempt to recover work, then nuke.

This means the common case (clean `gt done`) is fast and automatic. Cleanup wisps are the exception, not the rule.

### Processing Polecat Mail

The Witness handles several mail types during its inbox check:

| Mail Type | Action |
|-----------|--------|
| `POLECAT_STARTED` | Register new polecat, begin monitoring |
| `POLECAT_DONE` | Auto-nuke if clean, cleanup wisp if dirty |
| `MERGED` | Informational -- polecat already nuked |
| `HELP` | Assess and respond to polecat request |
| `HANDOFF` | Process context handoff for session cycling |

### Swarm Tracking

When the Mayor dispatches multiple polecats as a batch (swarm), the Witness tracks completion. For more on batch dispatch patterns, see [Scaling Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30):

```text
Swarm started (4 polecats) → Monitor all 4
Polecat 1 done → 3 remaining
Polecat 2 done → 2 remaining
Polecat 3 done → 1 remaining
Polecat 4 done → Swarm complete → Notify Mayor
```

### Refinery Health Check

During each patrol, the Witness verifies the Refinery is alive and processing MRs. If the Refinery is stuck, the Witness nudges it. If it remains unresponsive, the Witness escalates to the Deacon.

## Troubleshooting

### Witness Patrol Is Not Running

The Witness runs on a 5-minute patrol cycle. If patrols have stopped:

```bash
gt rig status <rig>          # Check Witness session state
gt deacon status             # Is the Deacon monitoring this Witness?
```

The Deacon detects missing Witness pings and restarts the Witness automatically.

### Polecats Are Not Being Cleaned Up

If completed polecats are accumulating, check that:

1. The Witness is receiving `POLECAT_DONE` mail
2. The Refinery is sending `MERGED` signals after merging
3. The Witness patrol cycle is running

```bash
gt polecat list              # See polecat states
gt mq list                   # Check if MRs are stuck in the queue
```

### Stalled Polecat Not Being Nudged

The Witness only nudges polecats during its 5-minute patrol cycle. A polecat must be stalled for the stall threshold (default 15 minutes) before the Witness takes action. Check:

```bash
gt polecat stale             # See what the Witness considers stalled
gt polecat status <name>     # Check specific polecat activity
```

### Witness Context Is Filling Up

Long-running Witness sessions accumulate context. The Witness handles this automatically: when context is HIGH, it hands off to a fresh session via `gt handoff`. If this is not happening, the Witness may be stuck:

```bash
gt nudge <rig>/witness "context check"
```

## Witness Activity Timeline

A typical 5-minute patrol cycle broken down by activity.

```mermaid
gantt
    title Witness Patrol Cycle (5 minutes)
    dateFormat mm:ss
    axisFormat %M:%S

    section Patrol
    List all polecats         :a1, 00:00, 30s
    Check each polecat        :a2, after a1, 2m
    Process mail inbox        :a3, after a2, 1m
    Check Refinery health     :a4, after a3, 30s
    Send patrol report        :a5, after a4, 30s
    Idle until next cycle     :a6, after a5, 30s
```


## Related

- [Deacon](deacon.md) -- Supervises the Witness and handles escalations from it
- [Polecats](polecats.md) -- Workers the Witness monitors
- [Refinery](refinery.md) -- Merge processor the Witness health-checks
- [Escalation System](../operations/escalations.md) -- How escalations flow from Witness to Deacon
- [Session Cycling](../concepts/session-cycling.md) -- How the Witness refreshes its own context
- [Hooks](../concepts/hooks.md) -- Mechanism for attaching work to polecats
- [GUPP](../concepts/gupp.md) -- The principle that drives polecat execution

### Blog Posts

- [The Witness: Gas Town's Self-Healing Watchdog](/blog/witness-explained) -- Deep dive into Witness patrol cycles and recovery patterns
- [Monitoring Your Fleet](/blog/monitoring-fleet) -- How to observe Witness activity across rigs
- [Death Warrants](/blog/death-warrants) -- How the Witness issues death warrants for zombie polecats and coordinates cleanup
- [Incident Response](/blog/incident-response) -- How the Witness escalation chain feeds into Gas Town's incident response process
