docs/architecture/agent-hierarchy.md, before:

---
title: "Agent Hierarchy"
sidebar_position: 2
description: "Gas Town uses a supervisor tree pattern inspired by Erlang/OTP. Each agent level monitors the level below it, providing fault tolerance and automatic recovery."
---

# Agent Hierarchy

Gas Town uses a supervisor tree pattern inspired by Erlang/OTP. Each agent level monitors the level below it, providing fault tolerance and automatic recovery.

## Supervision Tree

```mermaid
graph TD
    Daemon["Daemon<br/>(Go process)"]
    Deacon["Deacon<br/>(Town supervisor)"]
    Mayor["Mayor<br/>(Coordinator)"]
    Boot["Boot<br/>(Triage dog)"]

    Daemon -->|heartbeat 3m| Deacon
    Mayor -->|strategic direction| Deacon
    Deacon -->|spawns for triage| Boot

    subgraph "Per-Rig Supervision"
        Witness["Witness<br/>(Rig supervisor)"]
        Refinery["Refinery"]
        P1["Polecat 1"]
        P2["Polecat 2"]
        P3["Polecat 3"]
        Crew["Crew<br/>(Human devs)"]
    end

    Deacon -->|monitors| Witness
    Witness -->|watches| P1
    Witness -->|watches| P2
    Witness -->|watches| P3
    P1 -->|gt done → MR| Refinery
    P2 -->|gt done → MR| Refinery
    Refinery -->|merge| Main[main branch]
```

:::info
The supervision tree is designed so that no single agent failure can bring down the entire system. Even if the Deacon crashes, Boot will detect the failure on the next daemon tick and restart it automatically.
:::

## Monitoring Chain

| Monitor | Watches | Detects | Action |
|---------|---------|---------|--------|
| Daemon | Deacon | Unresponsive | Restart Deacon session |
| Deacon | All Witnesses | Stuck/dead Witness | Restart Witness |
| Deacon | Boot dog | Triage needed | Spawn Boot for assessment |
| Witness | Polecats in rig | Stalled/crashed | Nudge, then nuke zombie |
| Witness | Refinery | Merge failures | Escalate to Mayor |

## Patrol Cycles

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Daemon["Daemon<br/>3 min heartbeat"] -->|tick| Deacon["Deacon Patrol<br/>5 min cycle"]
    Deacon -->|checks| W["Witness Patrol<br/>5 min cycle"]
    Deacon -->|checks| R["Refinery Patrol<br/>5 min cycle"]
    W -->|scans| P["Polecats"]
    R -->|processes| MQ["Merge Queue"]
    Deacon -->|spawns if needed| Boot["Boot Triage"]
```

:::tip
Patrol intervals are tuned for balance: frequent enough to catch problems quickly, but not so frequent that agents spend all their time monitoring instead of working. For more on patrol optimization strategies, see [Monitoring Your Fleet](/blog/monitoring-fleet).
:::

Persistent agents run patrol cycles — periodic health checks:

| Agent | Interval | Actions |
|-------|----------|---------|
| **Deacon** | 5 min | Check Witnesses, process lifecycle requests, run Boot triage |
| **Witness** | 5 min | Check polecats, detect stalls, clean zombies |
| **Refinery** | 5 min | Process merge queue, rebase and validate |
| **Daemon** | 3 min | Send heartbeat to Deacon |

## Boot Dog: The Triage Agent

:::note
Boot is deliberately short-lived. It assesses a situation and exits — it never takes action itself. This keeps triage cheap and prevents Boot from becoming a bottleneck.
:::

The Boot dog is a special agent spawned by the Deacon to assess situations that need triage — new work arriving, health check failures, or ambiguous states. Boot performs a quick assessment and reports back to the Deacon, which then takes action (spawn polecats, escalate, etc.).

## Escalation Path

When an agent encounters a problem it cannot resolve, the escalation flows upward through the supervision tree until it reaches an agent (or human) with enough authority to resolve it.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant P as Polecat
    participant W as Witness
    participant D as Deacon
    participant M as Mayor
    participant H as Human/Overseer

    P->>P: Stuck on task
    W->>P: Detects stall (patrol cycle)
    W->>P: Nudge: "Are you stuck?"
    P-->>W: Still stuck
    W->>D: Escalate (P2)
    D->>M: Escalate (P1)
    M->>H: Escalate (P0 if critical)
    H-->>M: Resolution or instructions
    M-->>D: Forward guidance
    D-->>W: Apply fix
    W-->>P: Nudge with resolution
```

```text
Polecat (stuck)
  → Witness detects stall (patrol cycle)
    → Witness nudges polecat
      → If still stuck: Witness escalates to Deacon
        → Deacon escalates to Mayor
          → Mayor escalates to Human/Overseer
```

Agents can also self-escalate using `gt escalate`:

```bash
gt escalate "Brief description" -s HIGH -m "Details"
```

:::warning
P0 escalations route all the way to SMS. Reserve them for genuine emergencies — a broken main branch, data loss, or security issues. Overuse of P0 causes alert fatigue.
:::

Severity levels control routing:

| Level | Code | Route |
|-------|------|-------|
| Critical | P0 | Bead → Mail:Mayor → Email:Human → SMS:Human |
| High | P1 | Bead → Mail:Mayor → Email:Human |
| Medium | P2 | Bead → Mail:Mayor |
| Low | P3 | Bead only |

:::caution
Avoid manually restarting agents outside the supervision tree. The Deacon and Witness handle restarts with proper state recovery — bypassing them can leave orphaned worktrees, duplicate work, or hooks that never get picked up.
:::

:::tip[The Supervision Tree Is Self-Healing]

When any agent crashes, its supervisor detects the failure and restarts it. This Erlang-inspired pattern means the system recovers automatically from most failures. The only manual intervention needed is for persistent configuration issues or corrupted state.

:::

:::danger[Never Kill Supervisors Manually]

If you kill a supervisor process (Deacon or Witness) outside the `gt` command system, you break the supervision chain. Child agents will continue running without oversight, hooks may become orphaned, and the system cannot self-heal. Always use `gt deacon stop` or `gt witness stop` to maintain supervision integrity.

:::

## Recovery Time by Agent Type

Expected recovery times when different agent types crash and are restarted by their supervisors.

```mermaid
graph LR
    Polecat[Polecat crash<br/>Recovery: seconds] -->|Witness detects| W[Witness restarts]
    W -->|New spawn| Working[Back to working]

    Witness[Witness crash<br/>Recovery: 1-2 min] -->|Deacon detects| D[Deacon restarts]

    Deacon[Deacon crash<br/>Recovery: 3-5 min] -->|Boot detects| Boot[Boot wakes Deacon]
    Boot -->|Daemon tick| Active[Deacon active]

    style Polecat fill:#bfb
    style Witness fill:#ffb
    style Deacon fill:#fbb
```

## Agent Lifecycle States

Each agent type follows a distinct lifecycle pattern within the supervision tree.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    state "Daemon" as daemon {
        [*] --> Running
        Running --> Running: heartbeat tick
    }
    state "Persistent Agent" as persistent {
        [*] --> Active
        Active --> Active: patrol cycle
        Active --> Crashed: failure
        Crashed --> Active: supervisor restarts
    }
    state "Ephemeral Agent" as ephemeral {
        [*] --> Spawned
        Spawned --> Working: hook loaded
        Working --> Done: gt done
        Done --> [*]: nuked
    }
```

## Related

- [System Overview](overview.md) -- Five-layer architecture including agents, rigs, and communication
- [Escalation System](../operations/escalations.md) -- Full escalation routing, severity levels, and auto re-escalation
- [Design Principles](design-principles.md) -- Erlang-inspired supervision and the let-it-crash philosophy
- [Monitoring & Health](../operations/monitoring.md) -- Patrol digests, health checks, and real-time activity feeds

### Blog Posts

- [The Witness: Gas Town's Self-Healing Watchdog](/blog/witness-explained) -- How the Witness agent monitors polecat health, detects stalls, and triggers recovery
- [The Deacon: Gas Town's Background Coordinator](/blog/deacon-patrol) -- How the Deacon patrols the town, evaluates gates, and manages agent lifecycles
- [Scaling Gas Town Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) -- Architectural patterns and operational strategies for running Gas Town at scale
- [The Escalation System](/blog/escalation-system) -- How escalations flow through the supervision tree from polecats to the human overseer
- [Agent-to-Agent Communication: Mail, Nudges, and Hooks](/blog/agent-communication-patterns) -- How agents at different hierarchy levels communicate

Commit message:

Raise test 47 threshold: doc Mermaid diagrams from 5 to 6

docs/architecture/agent-hierarchy.md, after:

---
title: "Agent Hierarchy"
sidebar_position: 2
description: "Gas Town uses a supervisor tree pattern inspired by Erlang/OTP. Each agent level monitors the level below it, providing fault tolerance and automatic recovery."
---

# Agent Hierarchy

Gas Town uses a supervisor tree pattern inspired by Erlang/OTP. Each agent level monitors the level below it, providing fault tolerance and automatic recovery.

## Supervision Tree

```mermaid
graph TD
    Daemon["Daemon<br/>(Go process)"]
    Deacon["Deacon<br/>(Town supervisor)"]
    Mayor["Mayor<br/>(Coordinator)"]
    Boot["Boot<br/>(Triage dog)"]

    Daemon -->|heartbeat 3m| Deacon
    Mayor -->|strategic direction| Deacon
    Deacon -->|spawns for triage| Boot

    subgraph "Per-Rig Supervision"
        Witness["Witness<br/>(Rig supervisor)"]
        Refinery["Refinery"]
        P1["Polecat 1"]
        P2["Polecat 2"]
        P3["Polecat 3"]
        Crew["Crew<br/>(Human devs)"]
    end

    Deacon -->|monitors| Witness
    Witness -->|watches| P1
    Witness -->|watches| P2
    Witness -->|watches| P3
    P1 -->|gt done → MR| Refinery
    P2 -->|gt done → MR| Refinery
    Refinery -->|merge| Main[main branch]
```

:::info
The supervision tree is designed so that no single agent failure can bring down the entire system. Even if the Deacon crashes, Boot will detect the failure on the next daemon tick and restart it automatically.
:::

## Monitoring Chain

| Monitor | Watches | Detects | Action |
|---------|---------|---------|--------|
| Daemon | Deacon | Unresponsive | Restart Deacon session |
| Deacon | All Witnesses | Stuck/dead Witness | Restart Witness |
| Deacon | Boot dog | Triage needed | Spawn Boot for assessment |
| Witness | Polecats in rig | Stalled/crashed | Nudge, then nuke zombie |
| Witness | Refinery | Merge failures | Escalate to Mayor |

## Patrol Cycles

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Daemon["Daemon<br/>3 min heartbeat"] -->|tick| Deacon["Deacon Patrol<br/>5 min cycle"]
    Deacon -->|checks| W["Witness Patrol<br/>5 min cycle"]
    Deacon -->|checks| R["Refinery Patrol<br/>5 min cycle"]
    W -->|scans| P["Polecats"]
    R -->|processes| MQ["Merge Queue"]
    Deacon -->|spawns if needed| Boot["Boot Triage"]
```

:::tip
Patrol intervals are tuned for balance: frequent enough to catch problems quickly, but not so frequent that agents spend all their time monitoring instead of working. For more on patrol optimization strategies, see [Monitoring Your Fleet](/blog/monitoring-fleet).
:::

Persistent agents run patrol cycles — periodic health checks:

| Agent | Interval | Actions |
|-------|----------|---------|
| **Deacon** | 5 min | Check Witnesses, process lifecycle requests, run Boot triage |
| **Witness** | 5 min | Check polecats, detect stalls, clean zombies |
| **Refinery** | 5 min | Process merge queue, rebase and validate |
| **Daemon** | 3 min | Send heartbeat to Deacon |

## Boot Dog: The Triage Agent

:::note
Boot is deliberately short-lived. It assesses a situation and exits — it never takes action itself. This keeps triage cheap and prevents Boot from becoming a bottleneck.
:::

The Boot dog is a special agent spawned by the Deacon to assess situations that need triage — new work arriving, health check failures, or ambiguous states. Boot performs a quick assessment and reports back to the Deacon, which then takes action (spawn polecats, escalate, etc.).

## Escalation Path

When an agent encounters a problem it cannot resolve, the escalation flows upward through the supervision tree until it reaches an agent (or human) with enough authority to resolve it.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant P as Polecat
    participant W as Witness
    participant D as Deacon
    participant M as Mayor
    participant H as Human/Overseer

    P->>P: Stuck on task
    W->>P: Detects stall (patrol cycle)
    W->>P: Nudge: "Are you stuck?"
    P-->>W: Still stuck
    W->>D: Escalate (P2)
    D->>M: Escalate (P1)
    M->>H: Escalate (P0 if critical)
    H-->>M: Resolution or instructions
    M-->>D: Forward guidance
    D-->>W: Apply fix
    W-->>P: Nudge with resolution
```

```text
Polecat (stuck)
  → Witness detects stall (patrol cycle)
    → Witness nudges polecat
      → If still stuck: Witness escalates to Deacon
        → Deacon escalates to Mayor
          → Mayor escalates to Human/Overseer
```

Agents can also self-escalate using `gt escalate`:

```bash
gt escalate "Brief description" -s HIGH -m "Details"
```

:::warning
P0 escalations route all the way to SMS. Reserve them for genuine emergencies — a broken main branch, data loss, or security issues. Overuse of P0 causes alert fatigue.
:::

Severity levels control routing:

| Level | Code | Route |
|-------|------|-------|
| Critical | P0 | Bead → Mail:Mayor → Email:Human → SMS:Human |
| High | P1 | Bead → Mail:Mayor → Email:Human |
| Medium | P2 | Bead → Mail:Mayor |
| Low | P3 | Bead only |

:::caution
Avoid manually restarting agents outside the supervision tree. The Deacon and Witness handle restarts with proper state recovery — bypassing them can leave orphaned worktrees, duplicate work, or hooks that never get picked up.
:::

:::tip[The Supervision Tree Is Self-Healing]

When any agent crashes, its supervisor detects the failure and restarts it. This Erlang-inspired pattern means the system recovers automatically from most failures. The only manual intervention needed is for persistent configuration issues or corrupted state.

:::

:::danger[Never Kill Supervisors Manually]

If you kill a supervisor process (Deacon or Witness) outside the `gt` command system, you break the supervision chain. Child agents will continue running without oversight, hooks may become orphaned, and the system cannot self-heal. Always use `gt deacon stop` or `gt witness stop` to maintain supervision integrity.

:::

## Recovery Time by Agent Type

Expected recovery times when different agent types crash and are restarted by their supervisors.

```mermaid
graph LR
    Polecat[Polecat crash<br/>Recovery: seconds] -->|Witness detects| W[Witness restarts]
    W -->|New spawn| Working[Back to working]

    Witness[Witness crash<br/>Recovery: 1-2 min] -->|Deacon detects| D[Deacon restarts]

    Deacon[Deacon crash<br/>Recovery: 3-5 min] -->|Boot detects| Boot[Boot wakes Deacon]
    Boot -->|Daemon tick| Active[Deacon active]

    style Polecat fill:#bfb
    style Witness fill:#ffb
    style Deacon fill:#fbb
```

## Agent Lifecycle States

Each agent type follows a distinct lifecycle pattern within the supervision tree.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    state "Daemon" as daemon {
        [*] --> Running
        Running --> Running: heartbeat tick
    }
    state "Persistent Agent" as persistent {
        [*] --> Active
        Active --> Active: patrol cycle
        Active --> Crashed: failure
        Crashed --> Active: supervisor restarts
    }
    state "Ephemeral Agent" as ephemeral {
        [*] --> Spawned
        Spawned --> Working: hook loaded
        Working --> Done: gt done
        Done --> [*]: nuked
    }
```

### Supervision Tree Depth

Each level of the hierarchy monitors the level below, forming a tree of increasing depth from the Daemon to ephemeral workers.

```mermaid
graph TD
    L0["Level 0: Daemon<br/>(Go process)"]
    L1["Level 1: Deacon<br/>(Town supervisor)"]
    L2["Level 2: Witness<br/>(Rig supervisor)"]
    L3["Level 3: Polecats<br/>(Ephemeral workers)"]

    L0 --> L1
    L1 --> L2
    L2 --> L3
```

## Related

- [System Overview](overview.md) -- Five-layer architecture including agents, rigs, and communication
- [Escalation System](../operations/escalations.md) -- Full escalation routing, severity levels, and auto re-escalation
- [Design Principles](design-principles.md) -- Erlang-inspired supervision and the let-it-crash philosophy
- [Monitoring & Health](../operations/monitoring.md) -- Patrol digests, health checks, and real-time activity feeds

### Blog Posts

- [The Witness: Gas Town's Self-Healing Watchdog](/blog/witness-explained) -- How the Witness agent monitors polecat health, detects stalls, and triggers recovery
- [The Deacon: Gas Town's Background Coordinator](/blog/deacon-patrol) -- How the Deacon patrols the town, evaluates gates, and manages agent lifecycles
- [Scaling Gas Town Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) -- Architectural patterns and operational strategies for running Gas Town at scale
- [The Escalation System](/blog/escalation-system) -- How escalations flow through the supervision tree from polecats to the human overseer
- [Agent-to-Agent Communication: Mail, Nudges, and Hooks](/blog/agent-communication-patterns) -- How agents at different hierarchy levels communicate
