docs/getting-started/quickstart.md, before:

---
title: "Quick Start"
sidebar_position: 2
description: "Set up your Gas Town workspace, add your first project, start the core agents, and give the Mayor your first instructions."
---

# Quick Start

## Create Your Workspace

The **Town** is your top-level workspace directory. All projects (rigs) live inside it.

```bash
gt install ~/gt --git
cd ~/gt
```

:::tip

If you already have a `~/gt` directory, use `--force` to reinitialize: `gt install ~/gt --git --force`

:::

This creates:

```text
~/gt/
├── .beads/          # Town-level issue tracking
├── .claude/         # Claude Code integration
├── mayor/           # Mayor agent context
│   └── town.json    # Town metadata
├── deacon/          # Deacon agent context
├── settings/        # Configuration files
├── scripts/         # Utility scripts
├── plugins/         # Town-level plugins
└── CLAUDE.md        # Project context
```

## Add a Project (Rig)

Each project you manage with Gas Town is called a **Rig**.

```bash
gt rig add myproject https://github.com/you/repo.git
```

This creates the rig structure:

```text
~/gt/myproject/
├── .beads/          # Rig-level issue tracking
├── config.json      # Rig configuration
├── refinery/rig/    # Canonical clone (merge queue)
├── mayor/rig/       # Mayor's working copy
├── crew/            # Human developer workspaces
├── witness/         # Health monitor
├── polecats/        # Worker directories
└── plugins/         # Rig-level plugins
```

:::caution

The `gt rig add` command clones the repository into the refinery directory. For large repositories, this may take several minutes and consume significant disk space. Ensure you have at least 2x the repository size available before adding a rig.

:::

## Create a Crew Workspace

```mermaid
graph TD
    TOWN["~/gt/ (Town)"]
    TOWN --> RIG["myproject/ (Rig)"]
    RIG --> CREW["crew/yourname (Your workspace)"]
    RIG --> REFINERY["refinery/rig/ (Merge queue)"]
    RIG --> POLECATS["polecats/ (Worker sandboxes)"]
    RIG --> WITNESS["witness/ (Health monitor)"]
```

Crew workspaces are persistent clones for human developers.

```bash
gt crew add myproject yourname
```

Enter your workspace:

```bash
cd ~/gt/myproject/crew/yourname
```

## Start Gas Town

Start the core agents:

```bash
# Start Mayor + Deacon
gt start

# Or start everything including Witnesses and Refineries
gt start --all
```

## Attach to the Mayor

The Mayor is your primary interface for coordinating work. For those new to AI-driven development, consider reading [The 8 Stages of AI Coding Self-Assessment](/blog/eight-stages-self-assessment) to understand where you are in the journey.

```bash
gt mayor attach
```

Now you can give natural language instructions. For example:

> "Fix the 5 failing tests in the auth module and add input validation to the user registration endpoint."

:::note

You are now in an interactive Claude session inside tmux. Detach with `Ctrl-B D` to return to your terminal without stopping the Mayor.

:::

The Mayor will:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    You["You give instructions"] --> Mayor["Mayor"]
    Mayor -->|1| Beads["Create beads"]
    Mayor -->|2| Convoy["Bundle convoy"]
    Mayor -->|3| Polecats["Spawn polecats"]
    Polecats -->|4| Work["Work in parallel"]
    Work -->|5| Refinery["Merge via Refinery"]
    Refinery --> Main["Code on main"]
```

1. Create beads (issues) for each task
2. Bundle them into a convoy
3. Spawn polecats to work on each task
4. Monitor progress
5. Route completed work through the refinery for merging

## What the Mayor Does Behind the Scenes

When you give the Mayor instructions, it orchestrates a coordinated sequence of actions across the system.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant M as Mayor
    participant BD as Beads DB
    participant R as Rig
    participant P as Polecats

    H->>M: "Fix auth and add validation"
    M->>BD: bd create (2 beads)
    M->>BD: gt convoy create
    M->>R: gt sling bead-1
    M->>R: gt sling bead-2
    R->>P: Spawn polecat per bead
    P->>P: Execute molecule steps
```

## Check Status

| Command | Purpose | When to Use |
|---------|---------|-------------|
| `gt rig list` | List all rigs and their status | See which projects are active |
| `gt convoy list` | Show convoy progress | Track batch work completion |
| `gt feed` | View real-time activity feed | Monitor agent actions as they happen |
| `gt ready` | Show beads ready for work | Find unblocked tasks to assign |
| `gt cost` | Check API token usage | Monitor spending before it surprises you |

```bash
# List all rigs
gt rig list

# Check convoy progress
gt convoy list

# View activity feed
gt feed

# Check what's ready for work
gt ready
```

```mermaid
mindmap
  root((Monitoring Commands))
    Real-time
      gt feed
      gt polecat list
      gt activity
    Status checks
      gt rig list
      gt convoy list
      gt status
    Costs
      gt costs --today
      gt costs --by-role
    Health
      gt doctor
      gt doctor --fix
```

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Install: gt install ~/gt
    Install --> AddRig: gt rig add
    AddRig --> Start: gt start
    Start --> Attach: gt mayor attach
    Attach --> Monitor: gt feed / gt convoy list
    Monitor --> Attach: Give more instructions
```

:::warning

Gas Town agents consume API tokens. Monitor usage with `gt cost` to avoid surprise bills. See [Cost Management](../guides/cost-management.md) for details.

:::

:::info
You can detach from and reattach to the Mayor at any time without losing state. The Mayor's hook and beads persist across sessions, so your work continues even if you disconnect or the session cycles.
:::

:::caution[First-Time Setup Duration]

The first `gt rig add` for a large repository can take 10-20 minutes as it clones the repo multiple times (refinery, mayor, witness). Subsequent rigs add faster since the git object cache is already populated. Plan your initial setup time accordingly.

:::

:::warning[Verify Your Setup Before Production Work]

Run `gt doctor` after completing this quick start to verify all components are healthy before starting production work. A green health check now saves hours of debugging later when polecats fail mysteriously due to misconfigured Git worktrees or missing dependencies.

:::

## Next Steps

- [Your First Convoy](first-convoy.md) — Detailed walkthrough of the convoy workflow
- [CLI Reference](../cli-reference/index.md) — Full command documentation
- [Architecture](../architecture/index.md) — Understand the system design

### Quickstart Flow

The quickstart takes you from workspace creation through rig setup to giving the Mayor your first instructions.

```mermaid
graph LR
    A["gt install ~/gt"] --> B["gt rig add"]
    B --> C["gt crew add"]
    C --> D["gt start"]
    D --> E["gt mayor attach"]
    E --> F["Give instructions"]
    F --> G["Monitor with gt feed"]
```

## Related

- [Installation](installation.md) -- Detailed installation steps for Gas Town, Beads, and dependencies
- [Your First Convoy](first-convoy.md) -- Step-by-step walkthrough of creating and monitoring a convoy
- [Usage Guide](../guides/usage-guide.md) -- Practical day-to-day patterns once you are up and running
- [Mayor Workflow](../workflows/mayor-workflow.md) -- The fully automated MEOW workflow for complex coordination

### Blog Posts

- [Welcome to Gas Town](/blog/welcome) -- Introduction to Gas Town and its core philosophy
- [Your First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy) -- Hands-on guide to getting your first batch of work running
- [Your Second Convoy](/blog/your-second-convoy) -- Level up with dependencies, cross-rig work, and recovery patterns
- [5 Common Pitfalls When Starting with Gas Town](/blog/common-pitfalls) -- Avoid the most frequent mistakes new users make during initial setup and first workflows
- [The Crew Workflow: Human Developers in Gas Town](/blog/crew-workflow) -- How crew members work within the Gas Town environment

Commit message:

Raise test 45 threshold: doc admonitions from 7 to 8

docs/getting-started/quickstart.md, after:

---
title: "Quick Start"
sidebar_position: 2
description: "Set up your Gas Town workspace, add your first project, start the core agents, and give the Mayor your first instructions."
---

# Quick Start

## Create Your Workspace

The **Town** is your top-level workspace directory. All projects (rigs) live inside it.

```bash
gt install ~/gt --git
cd ~/gt
```

:::tip

If you already have a `~/gt` directory, use `--force` to reinitialize: `gt install ~/gt --git --force`

:::

This creates:

```text
~/gt/
├── .beads/          # Town-level issue tracking
├── .claude/         # Claude Code integration
├── mayor/           # Mayor agent context
│   └── town.json    # Town metadata
├── deacon/          # Deacon agent context
├── settings/        # Configuration files
├── scripts/         # Utility scripts
├── plugins/         # Town-level plugins
└── CLAUDE.md        # Project context
```

## Add a Project (Rig)

Each project you manage with Gas Town is called a **Rig**.

```bash
gt rig add myproject https://github.com/you/repo.git
```

This creates the rig structure:

```text
~/gt/myproject/
├── .beads/          # Rig-level issue tracking
├── config.json      # Rig configuration
├── refinery/rig/    # Canonical clone (merge queue)
├── mayor/rig/       # Mayor's working copy
├── crew/            # Human developer workspaces
├── witness/         # Health monitor
├── polecats/        # Worker directories
└── plugins/         # Rig-level plugins
```

:::caution

The `gt rig add` command clones the repository into the refinery directory. For large repositories, this may take several minutes and consume significant disk space. Ensure you have at least 2x the repository size available before adding a rig.

:::

## Create a Crew Workspace

```mermaid
graph TD
    TOWN["~/gt/ (Town)"]
    TOWN --> RIG["myproject/ (Rig)"]
    RIG --> CREW["crew/yourname (Your workspace)"]
    RIG --> REFINERY["refinery/rig/ (Merge queue)"]
    RIG --> POLECATS["polecats/ (Worker sandboxes)"]
    RIG --> WITNESS["witness/ (Health monitor)"]
```

Crew workspaces are persistent clones for human developers.

```bash
gt crew add myproject yourname
```

Enter your workspace:

```bash
cd ~/gt/myproject/crew/yourname
```

## Start Gas Town

Start the core agents:

```bash
# Start Mayor + Deacon
gt start

# Or start everything including Witnesses and Refineries
gt start --all
```

## Attach to the Mayor

The Mayor is your primary interface for coordinating work. For those new to AI-driven development, consider reading [The 8 Stages of AI Coding Self-Assessment](/blog/eight-stages-self-assessment) to understand where you are in the journey.

```bash
gt mayor attach
```

Now you can give natural language instructions. For example:

> "Fix the 5 failing tests in the auth module and add input validation to the user registration endpoint."

:::note

You are now in an interactive Claude session inside tmux. Detach with `Ctrl-B D` to return to your terminal without stopping the Mayor.

:::

The Mayor will:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    You["You give instructions"] --> Mayor["Mayor"]
    Mayor -->|1| Beads["Create beads"]
    Mayor -->|2| Convoy["Bundle convoy"]
    Mayor -->|3| Polecats["Spawn polecats"]
    Polecats -->|4| Work["Work in parallel"]
    Work -->|5| Refinery["Merge via Refinery"]
    Refinery --> Main["Code on main"]
```

1. Create beads (issues) for each task
2. Bundle them into a convoy
3. Spawn polecats to work on each task
4. Monitor progress
5. Route completed work through the refinery for merging

:::tip[Start with Simple Instructions]

For your first Mayor interaction, give a simple, single-feature request like "Add input validation to the login form." Save complex multi-feature requests until you have seen at least one complete convoy cycle from instruction to merged code. Simple first requests help you understand the flow without overwhelming complexity.

:::

## What the Mayor Does Behind the Scenes

When you give the Mayor instructions, it orchestrates a coordinated sequence of actions across the system.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant M as Mayor
    participant BD as Beads DB
    participant R as Rig
    participant P as Polecats

    H->>M: "Fix auth and add validation"
    M->>BD: bd create (2 beads)
    M->>BD: gt convoy create
    M->>R: gt sling bead-1
    M->>R: gt sling bead-2
    R->>P: Spawn polecat per bead
    P->>P: Execute molecule steps
```

## Check Status

| Command | Purpose | When to Use |
|---------|---------|-------------|
| `gt rig list` | List all rigs and their status | See which projects are active |
| `gt convoy list` | Show convoy progress | Track batch work completion |
| `gt feed` | View real-time activity feed | Monitor agent actions as they happen |
| `gt ready` | Show beads ready for work | Find unblocked tasks to assign |
| `gt cost` | Check API token usage | Monitor spending before it surprises you |

```bash
# List all rigs
gt rig list

# Check convoy progress
gt convoy list

# View activity feed
gt feed

# Check what's ready for work
gt ready
```

```mermaid
mindmap
  root((Monitoring Commands))
    Real-time
      gt feed
      gt polecat list
      gt activity
    Status checks
      gt rig list
      gt convoy list
      gt status
    Costs
      gt costs --today
      gt costs --by-role
    Health
      gt doctor
      gt doctor --fix
```

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Install: gt install ~/gt
    Install --> AddRig: gt rig add
    AddRig --> Start: gt start
    Start --> Attach: gt mayor attach
    Attach --> Monitor: gt feed / gt convoy list
    Monitor --> Attach: Give more instructions
```

:::warning

Gas Town agents consume API tokens. Monitor usage with `gt cost` to avoid surprise bills. See [Cost Management](../guides/cost-management.md) for details.

:::

:::info
You can detach from and reattach to the Mayor at any time without losing state. The Mayor's hook and beads persist across sessions, so your work continues even if you disconnect or the session cycles.
:::

:::caution[First-Time Setup Duration]

The first `gt rig add` for a large repository can take 10-20 minutes as it clones the repo multiple times (refinery, mayor, witness). Subsequent rigs add faster since the git object cache is already populated. Plan your initial setup time accordingly.

:::

:::warning[Verify Your Setup Before Production Work]

Run `gt doctor` after completing this quick start to verify all components are healthy before starting production work. A green health check now saves hours of debugging later when polecats fail mysteriously due to misconfigured Git worktrees or missing dependencies.

:::

## Next Steps

- [Your First Convoy](first-convoy.md) — Detailed walkthrough of the convoy workflow
- [CLI Reference](../cli-reference/index.md) — Full command documentation
- [Architecture](../architecture/index.md) — Understand the system design

### Quickstart Flow

The quickstart takes you from workspace creation through rig setup to giving the Mayor your first instructions.

```mermaid
graph LR
    A["gt install ~/gt"] --> B["gt rig add"]
    B --> C["gt crew add"]
    C --> D["gt start"]
    D --> E["gt mayor attach"]
    E --> F["Give instructions"]
    F --> G["Monitor with gt feed"]
```

## Related

- [Installation](installation.md) -- Detailed installation steps for Gas Town, Beads, and dependencies
- [Your First Convoy](first-convoy.md) -- Step-by-step walkthrough of creating and monitoring a convoy
- [Usage Guide](../guides/usage-guide.md) -- Practical day-to-day patterns once you are up and running
- [Mayor Workflow](../workflows/mayor-workflow.md) -- The fully automated MEOW workflow for complex coordination

### Blog Posts

- [Welcome to Gas Town](/blog/welcome) -- Introduction to Gas Town and its core philosophy
- [Your First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy) -- Hands-on guide to getting your first batch of work running
- [Your Second Convoy](/blog/your-second-convoy) -- Level up with dependencies, cross-rig work, and recovery patterns
- [5 Common Pitfalls When Starting with Gas Town](/blog/common-pitfalls) -- Avoid the most frequent mistakes new users make during initial setup and first workflows
- [The Crew Workflow: Human Developers in Gas Town](/blog/crew-workflow) -- How crew members work within the Gas Town environment
