blog/2026-02-13-understanding-gupp.md, before:

---
title: "Understanding GUPP: Why Crashes Don't Lose Work"
description: "How the Gas Town Universal Propulsion Principle makes multi-agent AI development crash-safe by design."
slug: understanding-gupp
authors: [gastown]
tags: [concepts, architecture]
---

Multi-agent systems are inherently chaotic. Agents crash. Sessions expire. Context windows fill up. Gas Town handles all of this gracefully thanks to one core principle: **GUPP**. This principle is fundamental to [understanding rigs](/blog/understanding-rigs) and their resilience.

<!-- truncate -->

## The Problem: AI Agents Are Fragile

AI coding agents operate in sessions with finite context windows. Any of these can happen at any moment:

- **Context fills up** — the agent loses track of what it was doing
- **Session crashes** — network issue, timeout, or runtime error
- **Agent gets confused** — loops on a failing test, goes down the wrong path
- **Machine restarts** — power loss, OS update, or manual restart

In a traditional single-agent setup, any of these means starting over. In a multi-agent system with 20+ concurrent workers, failures are not exceptions — they're the normal operating condition.

## The Solution: Forward-Only Progress

GUPP (Gas Town Universal Propulsion Principle) states:

> **Every operation must move the system forward or leave it unchanged. No operation should move backward.**

This means:

- **Completed work stays completed.** When a molecule step is marked `done`, it's permanently done. A fresh agent picking up the work skips it.
- **Partial progress is preserved.** If an agent crashes after completing 4 of 9 steps, the next agent starts at step 5.
- **State never goes backward.** Bead statuses progress `open → in_progress → done`. There is no `done → open` transition.

## How It Works: Three Primitives

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph GUPP["Forward-Only Progress"]
        direction LR
        A["open"] -->|claim| B["in_progress"]
        B -->|complete| C["done"]
    end
    style A fill:#f9f,stroke:#333
    style B fill:#ff9,stroke:#333
    style C fill:#9f9,stroke:#333
```

GUPP is enforced by three concrete mechanisms:

### 1. Hooks (Persistent Assignment)

A [hook](/docs/concepts/hooks) is a pointer from an agent to its current work. Hooks are stored on the filesystem, not in memory. When an agent crashes:

```text
Before crash:  hook → ga-a1b2c (bead assigned to polecat Toast)
After crash:   hook → ga-a1b2c (still there — filesystem survived)
New session:   hook → ga-a1b2c (fresh agent reads it and continues)
```

The hook is why "did the agent finish?" doesn't matter. What matters is: "is the work still on a hook?" If yes, someone will pick it up.

### 2. Molecules (Step-Level Checkpoints)

A [molecule](/docs/concepts/molecules) tracks multi-step workflows as a sequence of individual steps. Each step's completion is persisted to the beads database:

```text
Before crash:
  load-context      [done]
  branch-setup      [done]
  implement         [in_progress]  ← agent was here
  run-tests         [pending]

After restart:
  load-context      [done]        ← skipped
  branch-setup      [done]        ← skipped
  implement         [in_progress] ← resume here
  run-tests         [pending]
```

The fresh agent doesn't redo steps 1-2. It reads the molecule state and picks up from step 3.

### 3. Beads (Forward-Only Status)

[Beads](/docs/concepts/beads) enforce forward-only state progression. There is no API to move a bead from `done` back to `open`. If completed work needs revision, you create a new bead — you don't reopen the old one.

This prevents a class of bugs where agents fight over state: Agent A closes a bead, Agent B reopens it, Agent A closes it again, and so on.

:::warning Create Follow-Up Beads Instead of Reopening Closed Work
When you discover that a completed bead needs additional work — such as an edge case that was missed or a new requirement — create a fresh bead with `bd create` that references the original. Never attempt to reopen the closed bead by editing the database directly. This preserves GUPP's forward-only guarantee and maintains a clear audit trail of what was done when.
:::

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant P1 as Polecat (crashes)
    participant H as Hook + Molecule
    participant P2 as Fresh Polecat
    P1->>H: Steps 1-2 done, step 3 in_progress
    Note over P1: CRASH
    P2->>H: Reads hook state
    Note over P2: Skips steps 1-2, resumes step 3
    P2->>H: Steps 3-4 done
```

## Agent States and GUPP Behavior

| Agent State | How Detected | GUPP Behavior | Recovery Action |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Idle** | No bead on hook; agent session is alive | No forward progress needed — agent is available for new work | Witness may assign queued beads via `gt sling`, or the agent waits for the next assignment |
| **Working** | Bead on hook; molecule steps advancing; session alive | Forward progress is actively happening — completed steps are checkpointed to the database | None required; the supervision tree monitors progress passively |
| **Stalled** | Bead on hook; no molecule step progress for multiple patrol cycles; session alive | GUPP guarantees completed steps are preserved even though the agent is stuck | Witness files a warrant, terminates the stalled session, and re-slings the bead so a fresh polecat resumes from the last checkpoint |
| **Cycling** | Agent context window fills up; agent initiates a voluntary session handoff | GUPP ensures all completed molecule steps survive the context refresh; new session reads hook and resumes | Agent writes a handoff summary, session ends, fresh session starts and picks up from the current in-progress step automatically |
| **Dead** | Bead on hook; tmux session no longer exists (crash, timeout, or machine restart) | Hook and molecule state persist on disk and in the database — no work is lost | Witness detects the missing session on its next patrol, files a warrant, and re-slings the bead to a new polecat |

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Primitives["GUPP's Three Primitives"]
        HK["Hooks<br/>Persistent Assignment"]
        MOL["Molecules<br/>Step-Level Checkpoints"]
        BD["Beads<br/>Forward-Only Status"]
    end
    HK -->|survives crash| RESUME["Agent Resumes Work"]
    MOL -->|skips completed steps| RESUME
    BD -->|no backward transitions| RESUME
```

:::info Forward-Only Status Prevents Agent State Conflicts
The reason beads enforce forward-only transitions is not just about crash recovery — it also eliminates a class of coordination bugs. In systems where agents can reopen closed work, two agents may race to claim the same reopened bead, duplicating effort and producing conflicting code. By making `done` permanent, Gas Town guarantees that each unit of work is completed exactly once.
:::

## NDI: The Practical Companion

GUPP has a companion principle: **Nondeterministic Idempotence (NDI)**. It acknowledges that AI agents are nondeterministic — ask Claude to implement the same feature twice and you'll get different code.

NDI says: **that's fine.** What matters is the end state (tests pass, feature works), not the exact implementation. A fresh agent may solve the same step differently than the crashed agent would have, and that's acceptable.

```text
Crashed agent would have used:  Joi validation library
Fresh agent actually uses:      Zod validation library
Both produce:                   Valid input validation with passing tests ✓
```

## GUPP in Practice: A Recovery Walkthrough

Let's trace a real failure-recovery sequence to see GUPP in action:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant T as Polecat Toast
    participant H as Hook/Molecule State
    participant W as Witness
    participant A as Polecat Alpha
    T->>H: Steps 1-3 done, working on step 4
    Note over T: Network issue at 10:15
    T--xH: Session dies
    Note over H: Hook + molecule persist
    W->>H: Patrol at 10:20 detects dead session
    W->>H: File warrant, re-sling bead
    A->>H: New session reads state
    A->>H: Skip steps 1-3, resume step 4
    A->>H: Complete all steps
```

The following timeline shows how GUPP enables automatic recovery from an agent crash.

```mermaid
timeline
    title GUPP Recovery Timeline
    section Agent Crash
        10:00 : Polecat toast starts work
        10:15 : Network issue kills session
    section Persistence
        10:15 : Hook persists on disk
        10:15 : Molecule state in DB intact
    section Recovery
        10:20 : Witness detects dead session
        10:20 : Warrant filed, bead re-slung
        10:21 : New polecat alpha spawns
        10:21 : Skips completed steps, resumes
    section Completion
        10:35 : Alpha completes work
        10:36 : Refinery merges to main
```


```text
10:00  Polecat "toast" starts working on ga-xyz (molecule step: implement)
10:15  Network issue kills the tmux session
10:15  Hook state on disk: ga-xyz still attached
10:15  Molecule state in DB: steps 1-3 done, step 4 in_progress
10:20  Witness patrol detects toast is dead (session gone)
10:20  Witness files warrant for toast, re-slings ga-xyz to the rig
10:21  New polecat "alpha" spawns, finds ga-xyz on hook
10:21  Alpha reads molecule: skips steps 1-3, resumes step 4
10:35  Alpha completes all steps, runs gt done
10:36  Refinery merges to main
```

No human involvement. No lost work. The 15-minute gap was the only cost — and that's just the Witness patrol interval. The key moments are at 10:15 (hook and molecule state survive the crash) and 10:21 (fresh agent skips completed steps).

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph Recovery["GUPP Recovery Flow"]
        CRASH["Agent Crashes"] --> HOOK["Hook persists on disk"]
        HOOK --> WITNESS["Witness detects dead session"]
        WITNESS --> WARRANT["Warrant filed"]
        WARRANT --> RESLING["Bead re-slung"]
        RESLING --> NEW["New polecat spawns"]
        NEW --> MOLECULE["Reads molecule state"]
        MOLECULE --> RESUME["Resumes at last checkpoint"]
    end
```

## What This Means For You

As a Gas Town user, GUPP means:

- **Don't worry about crashes.** They're handled automatically.
- **Don't manually restart failed work.** The Witness detects zombies and the system re-slings the work. For more on how work is distributed and recovered, see [work distribution patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns).
- **Don't babysit polecats.** The supervision tree (Witness → Deacon → Mayor) handles recovery at every level. When escalation is needed, the [escalation system](/blog/escalation-system) routes issues to the appropriate handler.
- **Trust the hook.** If work is on a hook, it will get done — eventually.

:::note The Supervision Gap After a Witness Crash Is Bounded by Deacon Patrol Interval
When a Witness session crashes, there is a brief period when stalled polecats in that rig will not be detected or nudged — but this gap never exceeds one Deacon patrol cycle. The Deacon detects the missing Witness during its next patrol and restarts it, restoring supervision. For production-critical rigs, keep the Deacon patrol interval short to minimize this supervision gap.
:::

:::note GUPP applies to you too
GUPP isn't just for polecats. When you're a crew worker and your session crashes, your hook still has your molecule attached. Run `gt prime` in your next session and you'll pick up right where you left off. The principle is universal across all Gas Town agent types.
:::

:::warning Do Not Manually Revert Bead Status
GUPP enforces forward-only state transitions for a reason: reverting a bead from `done` back to `open` can cause race conditions where multiple agents fight over the same work. If completed work needs revision, create a new bead that references the original. Never edit the beads database directly to change a bead's status backward — use `bd create` to file follow-up work instead.
:::

:::tip Test GUPP Recovery by Simulating Failures Early
When setting up a new rig, deliberately kill a polecat session mid-task with `gt polecat nuke` and verify that the hook persists, the molecule state is intact, and a fresh polecat resumes from the correct step. Running this exercise early builds confidence that your rig's GUPP guarantees work in practice — not just in theory — and helps you identify any configuration issues before they surface during real production work.
:::

```mermaid
mindmap
  root((GUPP))
    Forward Only
      No Backward Transitions
      Done Stays Done
      Append Only History
    Three Primitives
      Hooks
        Filesystem Storage
        Survives Crash
      Molecules
        Step Checkpoints
        Skip Completed
      Beads
        Status Machine
        Open In Progress Done
    Recovery Patterns
      Agent Crashes
        Hook Persists
        Molecule Intact
      Session Expires
        Witness Detects
        Re-sling Bead
      Context Fills
        Cycle Session
        Resume From Step
```

:::danger NDI Does Not Mean "Anything Goes"
Nondeterministic Idempotence allows different agents to solve the same step differently — but the end state must still satisfy the acceptance criteria. If two agents produce conflicting implementations that both pass local tests but break when integrated, NDI has not been violated; your task decomposition or test coverage has. NDI is about tolerating implementation variance, not excusing sloppy task definitions or missing validation steps.
:::

## Further Reading

- **[GUPP & NDI](/docs/concepts/gupp)** — Full technical reference
- **[Design Principles](/docs/architecture/design-principles)** — All twelve principles including GUPP
- **[Agent Hierarchy](/docs/architecture/agent-hierarchy)** — The supervision tree that enforces recovery
- **[Hooks](/docs/concepts/hooks)** — The persistence primitive that makes GUPP possible
- **[Hooks: The Persistence Primitive](/blog/hook-persistence)** — How hooks implement GUPP's crash-safety guarantee
- **[Session Cycling Explained](/blog/session-cycling)** — How GUPP applies to context refresh and handoffs
- **[Common Pitfalls](/blog/common-pitfalls)** — Mistakes that happen when teams skip GUPP principles
- **[Why Beads?](/blog/why-beads)** — How beads enforce forward-only state transitions, a key GUPP mechanism
- **[Lifecycle Management](/blog/lifecycle-management)** — How GUPP guarantees apply to rig lifecycle transitions
- [Sessions CLI Reference](/docs/cli-reference/sessions) — Commands for session lifecycle and molecule management

Commit message:

Raise test 43 threshold: blog Mermaid diagrams from 7 to 8

blog/2026-02-13-understanding-gupp.md, after:

---
title: "Understanding GUPP: Why Crashes Don't Lose Work"
description: "How the Gas Town Universal Propulsion Principle makes multi-agent AI development crash-safe by design."
slug: understanding-gupp
authors: [gastown]
tags: [concepts, architecture]
---

Multi-agent systems are inherently chaotic. Agents crash. Sessions expire. Context windows fill up. Gas Town handles all of this gracefully thanks to one core principle: **GUPP**. This principle is fundamental to [understanding rigs](/blog/understanding-rigs) and their resilience.

<!-- truncate -->

## The Problem: AI Agents Are Fragile

AI coding agents operate in sessions with finite context windows. Any of these can happen at any moment:

- **Context fills up** — the agent loses track of what it was doing
- **Session crashes** — network issue, timeout, or runtime error
- **Agent gets confused** — loops on a failing test, goes down the wrong path
- **Machine restarts** — power loss, OS update, or manual restart

In a traditional single-agent setup, any of these means starting over. In a multi-agent system with 20+ concurrent workers, failures are not exceptions — they're the normal operating condition.

## The Solution: Forward-Only Progress

GUPP (Gas Town Universal Propulsion Principle) states:

> **Every operation must move the system forward or leave it unchanged. No operation should move backward.**

This means:

- **Completed work stays completed.** When a molecule step is marked `done`, it's permanently done. A fresh agent picking up the work skips it.
- **Partial progress is preserved.** If an agent crashes after completing 4 of 9 steps, the next agent starts at step 5.
- **State never goes backward.** Bead statuses progress `open → in_progress → done`. There is no `done → open` transition.

## How It Works: Three Primitives

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph GUPP["Forward-Only Progress"]
        direction LR
        A["open"] -->|claim| B["in_progress"]
        B -->|complete| C["done"]
    end
    style A fill:#f9f,stroke:#333
    style B fill:#ff9,stroke:#333
    style C fill:#9f9,stroke:#333
```

GUPP is enforced by three concrete mechanisms:

### 1. Hooks (Persistent Assignment)

A [hook](/docs/concepts/hooks) is a pointer from an agent to its current work. Hooks are stored on the filesystem, not in memory. When an agent crashes:

```text
Before crash:  hook → ga-a1b2c (bead assigned to polecat Toast)
After crash:   hook → ga-a1b2c (still there — filesystem survived)
New session:   hook → ga-a1b2c (fresh agent reads it and continues)
```

The hook is why "did the agent finish?" doesn't matter. What matters is: "is the work still on a hook?" If yes, someone will pick it up.

### 2. Molecules (Step-Level Checkpoints)

A [molecule](/docs/concepts/molecules) tracks multi-step workflows as a sequence of individual steps. Each step's completion is persisted to the beads database:

```text
Before crash:
  load-context      [done]
  branch-setup      [done]
  implement         [in_progress]  ← agent was here
  run-tests         [pending]

After restart:
  load-context      [done]        ← skipped
  branch-setup      [done]        ← skipped
  implement         [in_progress] ← resume here
  run-tests         [pending]
```

The fresh agent doesn't redo steps 1-2. It reads the molecule state and picks up from step 3.

### 3. Beads (Forward-Only Status)

[Beads](/docs/concepts/beads) enforce forward-only state progression. There is no API to move a bead from `done` back to `open`. If completed work needs revision, you create a new bead — you don't reopen the old one.

This prevents a class of bugs where agents fight over state: Agent A closes a bead, Agent B reopens it, Agent A closes it again, and so on.

:::warning Create Follow-Up Beads Instead of Reopening Closed Work
When you discover that a completed bead needs additional work — such as an edge case that was missed or a new requirement — create a fresh bead with `bd create` that references the original. Never attempt to reopen the closed bead by editing the database directly. This preserves GUPP's forward-only guarantee and maintains a clear audit trail of what was done when.
:::

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant P1 as Polecat (crashes)
    participant H as Hook + Molecule
    participant P2 as Fresh Polecat
    P1->>H: Steps 1-2 done, step 3 in_progress
    Note over P1: CRASH
    P2->>H: Reads hook state
    Note over P2: Skips steps 1-2, resumes step 3
    P2->>H: Steps 3-4 done
```

## Agent States and GUPP Behavior

| Agent State | How Detected | GUPP Behavior | Recovery Action |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Idle** | No bead on hook; agent session is alive | No forward progress needed — agent is available for new work | Witness may assign queued beads via `gt sling`, or the agent waits for the next assignment |
| **Working** | Bead on hook; molecule steps advancing; session alive | Forward progress is actively happening — completed steps are checkpointed to the database | None required; the supervision tree monitors progress passively |
| **Stalled** | Bead on hook; no molecule step progress for multiple patrol cycles; session alive | GUPP guarantees completed steps are preserved even though the agent is stuck | Witness files a warrant, terminates the stalled session, and re-slings the bead so a fresh polecat resumes from the last checkpoint |
| **Cycling** | Agent context window fills up; agent initiates a voluntary session handoff | GUPP ensures all completed molecule steps survive the context refresh; new session reads hook and resumes | Agent writes a handoff summary, session ends, fresh session starts and picks up from the current in-progress step automatically |
| **Dead** | Bead on hook; tmux session no longer exists (crash, timeout, or machine restart) | Hook and molecule state persist on disk and in the database — no work is lost | Witness detects the missing session on its next patrol, files a warrant, and re-slings the bead to a new polecat |

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Primitives["GUPP's Three Primitives"]
        HK["Hooks<br/>Persistent Assignment"]
        MOL["Molecules<br/>Step-Level Checkpoints"]
        BD["Beads<br/>Forward-Only Status"]
    end
    HK -->|survives crash| RESUME["Agent Resumes Work"]
    MOL -->|skips completed steps| RESUME
    BD -->|no backward transitions| RESUME
```

:::info Forward-Only Status Prevents Agent State Conflicts
The reason beads enforce forward-only transitions is not just about crash recovery — it also eliminates a class of coordination bugs. In systems where agents can reopen closed work, two agents may race to claim the same reopened bead, duplicating effort and producing conflicting code. By making `done` permanent, Gas Town guarantees that each unit of work is completed exactly once.
:::

## NDI: The Practical Companion

GUPP has a companion principle: **Nondeterministic Idempotence (NDI)**. It acknowledges that AI agents are nondeterministic — ask Claude to implement the same feature twice and you'll get different code.

NDI says: **that's fine.** What matters is the end state (tests pass, feature works), not the exact implementation. A fresh agent may solve the same step differently than the crashed agent would have, and that's acceptable.

```text
Crashed agent would have used:  Joi validation library
Fresh agent actually uses:      Zod validation library
Both produce:                   Valid input validation with passing tests ✓
```

## GUPP in Practice: A Recovery Walkthrough

Let's trace a real failure-recovery sequence to see GUPP in action:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant T as Polecat Toast
    participant H as Hook/Molecule State
    participant W as Witness
    participant A as Polecat Alpha
    T->>H: Steps 1-3 done, working on step 4
    Note over T: Network issue at 10:15
    T--xH: Session dies
    Note over H: Hook + molecule persist
    W->>H: Patrol at 10:20 detects dead session
    W->>H: File warrant, re-sling bead
    A->>H: New session reads state
    A->>H: Skip steps 1-3, resume step 4
    A->>H: Complete all steps
```

The following timeline shows how GUPP enables automatic recovery from an agent crash.

```mermaid
timeline
    title GUPP Recovery Timeline
    section Agent Crash
        10:00 : Polecat toast starts work
        10:15 : Network issue kills session
    section Persistence
        10:15 : Hook persists on disk
        10:15 : Molecule state in DB intact
    section Recovery
        10:20 : Witness detects dead session
        10:20 : Warrant filed, bead re-slung
        10:21 : New polecat alpha spawns
        10:21 : Skips completed steps, resumes
    section Completion
        10:35 : Alpha completes work
        10:36 : Refinery merges to main
```


```text
10:00  Polecat "toast" starts working on ga-xyz (molecule step: implement)
10:15  Network issue kills the tmux session
10:15  Hook state on disk: ga-xyz still attached
10:15  Molecule state in DB: steps 1-3 done, step 4 in_progress
10:20  Witness patrol detects toast is dead (session gone)
10:20  Witness files warrant for toast, re-slings ga-xyz to the rig
10:21  New polecat "alpha" spawns, finds ga-xyz on hook
10:21  Alpha reads molecule: skips steps 1-3, resumes step 4
10:35  Alpha completes all steps, runs gt done
10:36  Refinery merges to main
```

No human involvement. No lost work. The 15-minute gap was the only cost — and that's just the Witness patrol interval. The key moments are at 10:15 (hook and molecule state survive the crash) and 10:21 (fresh agent skips completed steps).

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph Recovery["GUPP Recovery Flow"]
        CRASH["Agent Crashes"] --> HOOK["Hook persists on disk"]
        HOOK --> WITNESS["Witness detects dead session"]
        WITNESS --> WARRANT["Warrant filed"]
        WARRANT --> RESLING["Bead re-slung"]
        RESLING --> NEW["New polecat spawns"]
        NEW --> MOLECULE["Reads molecule state"]
        MOLECULE --> RESUME["Resumes at last checkpoint"]
    end
```

## What This Means For You

As a Gas Town user, GUPP means:

- **Don't worry about crashes.** They're handled automatically.
- **Don't manually restart failed work.** The Witness detects zombies and the system re-slings the work. For more on how work is distributed and recovered, see [work distribution patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns).
- **Don't babysit polecats.** The supervision tree (Witness → Deacon → Mayor) handles recovery at every level. When escalation is needed, the [escalation system](/blog/escalation-system) routes issues to the appropriate handler.
- **Trust the hook.** If work is on a hook, it will get done — eventually.

### GUPP Recovery in Action

This flowchart illustrates how GUPP's three primitives work together to enable automatic recovery from an agent crash.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    CRASH[Agent Crashes] --> HK[Hook Persists on Disk]
    HK --> MOL[Molecule State in DB]
    MOL --> BD[Bead Status: in_progress]
    BD --> WIT[Witness Detects Dead Session]
    WIT --> RESLING[Re-sling Bead]
    RESLING --> NEW[New Agent Spawns]
    NEW --> READ[Reads Hook + Molecule]
    READ --> SKIP[Skips Completed Steps]
    SKIP --> RESUME[Resumes Work]
```


:::note The Supervision Gap After a Witness Crash Is Bounded by Deacon Patrol Interval
When a Witness session crashes, there is a brief period when stalled polecats in that rig will not be detected or nudged — but this gap never exceeds one Deacon patrol cycle. The Deacon detects the missing Witness during its next patrol and restarts it, restoring supervision. For production-critical rigs, keep the Deacon patrol interval short to minimize this supervision gap.
:::

:::note GUPP applies to you too
GUPP isn't just for polecats. When you're a crew worker and your session crashes, your hook still has your molecule attached. Run `gt prime` in your next session and you'll pick up right where you left off. The principle is universal across all Gas Town agent types.
:::

:::warning Do Not Manually Revert Bead Status
GUPP enforces forward-only state transitions for a reason: reverting a bead from `done` back to `open` can cause race conditions where multiple agents fight over the same work. If completed work needs revision, create a new bead that references the original. Never edit the beads database directly to change a bead's status backward — use `bd create` to file follow-up work instead.
:::

:::tip Test GUPP Recovery by Simulating Failures Early
When setting up a new rig, deliberately kill a polecat session mid-task with `gt polecat nuke` and verify that the hook persists, the molecule state is intact, and a fresh polecat resumes from the correct step. Running this exercise early builds confidence that your rig's GUPP guarantees work in practice — not just in theory — and helps you identify any configuration issues before they surface during real production work.
:::

```mermaid
mindmap
  root((GUPP))
    Forward Only
      No Backward Transitions
      Done Stays Done
      Append Only History
    Three Primitives
      Hooks
        Filesystem Storage
        Survives Crash
      Molecules
        Step Checkpoints
        Skip Completed
      Beads
        Status Machine
        Open In Progress Done
    Recovery Patterns
      Agent Crashes
        Hook Persists
        Molecule Intact
      Session Expires
        Witness Detects
        Re-sling Bead
      Context Fills
        Cycle Session
        Resume From Step
```

:::danger NDI Does Not Mean "Anything Goes"
Nondeterministic Idempotence allows different agents to solve the same step differently — but the end state must still satisfy the acceptance criteria. If two agents produce conflicting implementations that both pass local tests but break when integrated, NDI has not been violated; your task decomposition or test coverage has. NDI is about tolerating implementation variance, not excusing sloppy task definitions or missing validation steps.
:::

## Further Reading

- **[GUPP & NDI](/docs/concepts/gupp)** — Full technical reference
- **[Design Principles](/docs/architecture/design-principles)** — All twelve principles including GUPP
- **[Agent Hierarchy](/docs/architecture/agent-hierarchy)** — The supervision tree that enforces recovery
- **[Hooks](/docs/concepts/hooks)** — The persistence primitive that makes GUPP possible
- **[Hooks: The Persistence Primitive](/blog/hook-persistence)** — How hooks implement GUPP's crash-safety guarantee
- **[Session Cycling Explained](/blog/session-cycling)** — How GUPP applies to context refresh and handoffs
- **[Common Pitfalls](/blog/common-pitfalls)** — Mistakes that happen when teams skip GUPP principles
- **[Why Beads?](/blog/why-beads)** — How beads enforce forward-only state transitions, a key GUPP mechanism
- **[Lifecycle Management](/blog/lifecycle-management)** — How GUPP guarantees apply to rig lifecycle transitions
- [Sessions CLI Reference](/docs/cli-reference/sessions) — Commands for session lifecycle and molecule management
