blog/2026-02-04-welcome.md, before:

---
title: Welcome to the Gas Town Blog
description: "Introducing the Gas Town documentation blog — multi-agent orchestration tips, workflow patterns, and release notes."
slug: welcome
authors: [gastown]
tags: [announcement]
---

Welcome to the Gas Town blog. This is where we share updates about Gas Town, tips for running multi-agent workflows, architecture deep dives, and practical guides for scaling AI-assisted development.

<!-- truncate -->

## What is Gas Town?

Gas Town is a multi-agent orchestration system that coordinates fleets of AI coding agents working on your projects simultaneously. Built on top of Claude Code (with support for other runtimes), it scales from a single agent to 20-30 concurrent workers — all managed through the `gt` CLI.

The name comes from the oil refinery citadel in Mad Max: Fury Road, reflecting the system's industrial approach to coordinating autonomous agents at scale.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    H[Human: Describe Intent] --> MY[Mayor: Decompose]
    MY --> CV[Convoy: Track Batch]
    CV --> P1[Polecat 1]
    CV --> P2[Polecat 2]
    CV --> P3[Polecat N]
    P1 --> RF[Refinery: Merge Queue]
    P2 --> RF
    P3 --> RF
    RF --> M[Clean Main Branch]
    W[Witness] -.->|monitors| P1
    W -.->|monitors| P2
    W -.->|monitors| P3
```

:::info Gas Town requires no changes to your existing codebase
Gas Town operates entirely outside your project's source tree. It uses its own git clones, its own merge queue, and its own communication layer. You do not need to add configuration files, SDKs, or plugins to your project to start using it.
:::

## Key Ideas

Gas Town is built around a few core principles that set it apart from ad-hoc multi-agent setups:

- **Supervisor trees** — Agents monitor each other in a hierarchy (Mayor → Deacon → Witness → Polecats), so failures are detected and recovered automatically.
- **Git-backed persistence** — All work state lives in git or git-adjacent storage. Context survives crashes, restarts, and session cycling.
- **Hook-driven propulsion** — When an agent finds work on its hook, it executes immediately. No confirmation step, no waiting for approval. This is what makes Gas Town fast.
- **Serialized merges** — The Refinery merge queue ensures that parallel agent work lands cleanly on main, one commit at a time.

## Why Gas Town?

AI coding agents are powerful individually, but running many of them simultaneously creates real coordination problems. Without orchestration, you end up with:

- **Merge conflicts** — Multiple agents editing the same files, overwriting each other's work
- **Lost context** — Agent sessions expire and work disappears because no one tracked the state
- **Zombie processes** — Stalled agents consuming tokens without making progress
- **Divergent branches** — Feature branches piling up with no one to merge them cleanly

Gas Town solves these problems with a battle-tested architecture: supervisor trees that detect failures, a merge queue that serializes commits, hook-driven assignment that eliminates idle time, and git-backed persistence that survives any crash. The result is a system where you describe what you want, and a fleet of agents delivers validated code to `main` — often in minutes rather than hours.

:::tip Think of it as a factory
Gas Town treats software development like a production line. Raw materials (beads) enter the system, workers (polecats) process them in parallel, quality control (Refinery) validates the output, and finished goods (commits) land on main. The supervision hierarchy (Mayor → Deacon → Witness) keeps the factory running 24/7.
:::

## What You'll Find Here

This blog covers practical topics for Gas Town users at every level:

- **Getting started** — [Your First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy), [What Stage Are You?](/blog/eight-stages-self-assessment)
- **Architecture deep dives** — [Gas Town vs CI/CD](/blog/gas-town-vs-cicd), [Understanding GUPP](/blog/understanding-gupp)
- **Operational guides** — [Incident Response](/blog/incident-response), [Cost Optimization](/blog/cost-optimization)
- **Advanced patterns** — [Advanced Convoy Patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns), [Custom Formulas](/blog/custom-formulas)

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    GS[Getting Started] --> FD[First Convoy]
    FD --> SC[Scaling Up]
    SC --> AD[Advanced Patterns]
    AD --> OP[Full Orchestration]
```

## Core Concepts at a Glance

| Concept | Role | Category | Description |
|---------|------|----------|-------------|
| **Rig** | Project environment | Infrastructure | An isolated workspace with its own git clone, merge queue, and worker pool. Each project gets its own rig. |
| **Polecat** | Transient worker agent | Agents | A short-lived AI coding agent that picks up a bead, executes the work, and terminates when done. The primary unit of parallel execution. |
| **Witness** | Agent supervisor | Supervision | Monitors running polecats for crashes, stalls, and failures. Restarts or escalates when something goes wrong. |
| **Refinery** | Merge queue | Infrastructure | Serializes parallel agent output into clean, validated commits on main. Ensures no merge conflicts or broken builds. |
| **Bead** | Work item | Work Tracking | A lightweight issue or task, stored in Dolt alongside your code. Beads are what agents pick up and work on. |
| **Convoy** | Batch tracker | Work Tracking | Groups multiple beads into a single trackable unit. Auto-closes when all beads in the batch complete. |
| **Molecule** | Workflow instance | Execution | A live, running workflow created by "pouring" a formula. Tracks which steps are done, in progress, or pending. |
| **Mayor** | Top-level orchestrator | Supervision | Decomposes high-level intents into beads, manages convoys, and oversees the entire agent hierarchy. |

## Core Architecture

Under the hood, Gas Town organizes work through several interlocking systems. **Rigs** are isolated project environments, each with their own git clone, merge queue, and worker pool. **Molecules** define multi-step workflows as state machines — they track which step each agent is on and what happens next. **Beads** provide lightweight issue tracking that lives alongside your code, powered by [Dolt](https://www.dolthub.com/) for versioned database storage.

The communication layer uses **mail** for asynchronous messages between agents and **nudge** for real-time wake-up signals. Combined with **hooks** that automatically assign work when agents start, this creates a self-propelling system where work flows continuously without human intervention.

The following diagram illustrates the supervision hierarchy that ensures reliability across the agent fleet.

```mermaid
graph TD
    DAEMON[Daemon: Go Process] --> DEACON[Deacon: Town Health]
    DEACON --> W1[Witness: Rig 1]
    DEACON --> W2[Witness: Rig 2]
    DEACON --> W3[Witness: Rig N]
    W1 --> P1[Polecats: Workers]
    W2 --> P2[Polecats: Workers]
    W3 --> P3[Polecats: Workers]
    DEACON --> BOOT[Boot: Triage]
    BOOT -.->|monitors| DEACON
```

For a deeper look at the architecture, see the [Architecture Overview](/docs/architecture/overview) and [Design Principles](/docs/architecture/design-principles).

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Rig["Project Rig"]
        B[Beads: Issue Tracking]
        M[Molecules: Workflows]
        MQ[Merge Queue]
        CR[Crew: Persistent Workers]
        PC[Polecats: Transient Workers]
    end
    subgraph Comms["Communication"]
        ML[Mail: Async Messages]
        NG[Nudge: Real-time Wakeup]
        HK[Hooks: Auto-assignment]
    end
    Comms --> Rig
```

:::warning Start with Good Test Coverage
Gas Town agents validate their own work by running your test suite. If your test coverage is low or your tests are unreliable, agents will land broken code on main or waste tokens retrying flaky failures. Invest in solid test infrastructure before scaling beyond a single agent -- it pays for itself many times over in reduced debugging and rework.
:::

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Install: gt install
    Install --> Configure: gt rig create
    Configure --> SingleAgent: Run 1 polecat
    SingleAgent --> MultiAgent: Scale to 3-5
    MultiAgent --> FullFleet: Scale to 10-30
    FullFleet --> Autonomous: Mayor-driven
    Autonomous --> [*]
```

:::tip Start Small and Scale Gradually
Most successful Gas Town deployments begin with a single rig and two or three polecats. This lets you validate your test suite, learn the supervision hierarchy, and build confidence before scaling to a full fleet. The [Eight Stages](/blog/eight-stages-self-assessment) guide helps you identify your current maturity level and plan the next step.
:::

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph Communication["Agent Communication Layer"]
        MAIL[Mail: Async Messages]
        NUDGE[Nudge: Wake Signals]
        HOOK[Hook: Work Assignment]
    end
    subgraph Storage["Persistence Layer"]
        BEADS[Beads: Issue Tracking]
        DOLT[Dolt: Versioned DB]
    end
    Communication --> Storage
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant M as Mayor
    participant B as Beads
    participant P as Polecat
    participant R as Refinery
    participant G as Main Branch
    H->>M: Describe intent
    M->>B: Create beads + convoy
    M->>P: Sling beads to workers
    P->>P: Execute in parallel
    P->>R: Submit merge requests
    R->>R: Rebase + validate + test
    R->>G: Fast-forward merge
    Note over G: Clean linear history
```

## Who Is Gas Town For?

Gas Town is designed for developers and teams who:

- **Already use AI coding agents** and want to scale from one agent to many without chaos
- **Work on large codebases** where multiple areas can be developed in parallel
- **Need predictable delivery** — convoy tracking and merge queue give visibility into progress
- **Want autonomous operation** — Gas Town runs while you sleep, handling failures and retries automatically

For human developers working alongside agents, the [crew workflow](/blog/crew-workflow) provides persistent workspaces and direct push access to main.

:::info You Don't Need 30 Agents to Benefit
Even with 2-3 concurrent polecats, Gas Town's Refinery and Witness prevent the coordination headaches of running agents ad-hoc. The system scales smoothly from a single agent to a full fleet, so start small and grow as you learn the patterns.
:::

You don't need to be running 30 agents to benefit. Even with 2-3 concurrent workers, Gas Town's Refinery and Witness dramatically reduce the manual coordination overhead compared to running agents ad-hoc. For a complete reference of all available commands, see the [CLI reference](/docs/cli-reference/town).

:::note Gas Town is runtime-agnostic
While Gas Town was built on Claude Code, the [multi-runtime support](/docs/guides/multi-runtime) means you can use other AI coding tools as polecats. The orchestration layer — beads, convoys, Refinery, supervision — works the same regardless of which LLM powers your agents.
:::

## Getting Started

If you're new here, check out the [Getting Started guide](/docs/getting-started/) to install Gas Town and run your first convoy. The [Quick Start](/docs/getting-started/quickstart/) will have you up and running in about 10 minutes.

For the full documentation, visit the [docs home](/docs/). If you prefer to learn by example, the [Usage Guide](/docs/guides/usage-guide/) walks through day-to-day workflows in detail. The [Cheat Sheet](/docs/getting-started/cheat-sheet) provides a handy reference for the most common commands.

:::caution Backup Your Work Before First Convoy
Before running your first convoy with real agents working in parallel, ensure you have a clean git history and push all important work. While Gas Town's merge queue prevents conflicts, the first convoy is the best time to learn the system's behavior without risking critical work in progress.
:::

We also recommend reading the [Eight Stages of Gas Town Maturity](/blog/eight-stages-self-assessment) to understand where you are on the learning curve and what to focus on next. For hands-on learners, the [First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy) tutorial walks through the full create-sling-merge cycle in about five minutes.

Stay tuned for more posts on workflow patterns, operational tips, and deep dives into Gas Town's internals.

- [Using Search](/docs/getting-started/using-search) — How to search across Gas Town documentation
- [Glossary](/docs/guides/glossary) — Definitions for all Gas Town terminology
- [Workspace CLI Reference](/docs/cli-reference/workspace) — Commands for installing, enabling, and managing your Gas Town workspace
- [Why Beads?](/blog/why-beads) — Understanding the bead-based issue tracking system that powers Gas Town workflows

Commit message:

Raise test 43 threshold: blog Mermaid diagrams from 7 to 8

blog/2026-02-04-welcome.md, after:

---
title: Welcome to the Gas Town Blog
description: "Introducing the Gas Town documentation blog — multi-agent orchestration tips, workflow patterns, and release notes."
slug: welcome
authors: [gastown]
tags: [announcement]
---

Welcome to the Gas Town blog. This is where we share updates about Gas Town, tips for running multi-agent workflows, architecture deep dives, and practical guides for scaling AI-assisted development.

<!-- truncate -->

## What is Gas Town?

Gas Town is a multi-agent orchestration system that coordinates fleets of AI coding agents working on your projects simultaneously. Built on top of Claude Code (with support for other runtimes), it scales from a single agent to 20-30 concurrent workers — all managed through the `gt` CLI.

The name comes from the oil refinery citadel in Mad Max: Fury Road, reflecting the system's industrial approach to coordinating autonomous agents at scale.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    H[Human: Describe Intent] --> MY[Mayor: Decompose]
    MY --> CV[Convoy: Track Batch]
    CV --> P1[Polecat 1]
    CV --> P2[Polecat 2]
    CV --> P3[Polecat N]
    P1 --> RF[Refinery: Merge Queue]
    P2 --> RF
    P3 --> RF
    RF --> M[Clean Main Branch]
    W[Witness] -.->|monitors| P1
    W -.->|monitors| P2
    W -.->|monitors| P3
```

:::info Gas Town requires no changes to your existing codebase
Gas Town operates entirely outside your project's source tree. It uses its own git clones, its own merge queue, and its own communication layer. You do not need to add configuration files, SDKs, or plugins to your project to start using it.
:::

## Key Ideas

Gas Town is built around a few core principles that set it apart from ad-hoc multi-agent setups:

- **Supervisor trees** — Agents monitor each other in a hierarchy (Mayor → Deacon → Witness → Polecats), so failures are detected and recovered automatically.
- **Git-backed persistence** — All work state lives in git or git-adjacent storage. Context survives crashes, restarts, and session cycling.
- **Hook-driven propulsion** — When an agent finds work on its hook, it executes immediately. No confirmation step, no waiting for approval. This is what makes Gas Town fast.
- **Serialized merges** — The Refinery merge queue ensures that parallel agent work lands cleanly on main, one commit at a time.

## Why Gas Town?

AI coding agents are powerful individually, but running many of them simultaneously creates real coordination problems. Without orchestration, you end up with:

- **Merge conflicts** — Multiple agents editing the same files, overwriting each other's work
- **Lost context** — Agent sessions expire and work disappears because no one tracked the state
- **Zombie processes** — Stalled agents consuming tokens without making progress
- **Divergent branches** — Feature branches piling up with no one to merge them cleanly

Gas Town solves these problems with a battle-tested architecture: supervisor trees that detect failures, a merge queue that serializes commits, hook-driven assignment that eliminates idle time, and git-backed persistence that survives any crash. The result is a system where you describe what you want, and a fleet of agents delivers validated code to `main` — often in minutes rather than hours.

:::tip Think of it as a factory
Gas Town treats software development like a production line. Raw materials (beads) enter the system, workers (polecats) process them in parallel, quality control (Refinery) validates the output, and finished goods (commits) land on main. The supervision hierarchy (Mayor → Deacon → Witness) keeps the factory running 24/7.
:::

## What You'll Find Here

This blog covers practical topics for Gas Town users at every level:

- **Getting started** — [Your First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy), [What Stage Are You?](/blog/eight-stages-self-assessment)
- **Architecture deep dives** — [Gas Town vs CI/CD](/blog/gas-town-vs-cicd), [Understanding GUPP](/blog/understanding-gupp)
- **Operational guides** — [Incident Response](/blog/incident-response), [Cost Optimization](/blog/cost-optimization)
- **Advanced patterns** — [Advanced Convoy Patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns), [Custom Formulas](/blog/custom-formulas)

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    GS[Getting Started] --> FD[First Convoy]
    FD --> SC[Scaling Up]
    SC --> AD[Advanced Patterns]
    AD --> OP[Full Orchestration]
```

## Core Concepts at a Glance

| Concept | Role | Category | Description |
|---------|------|----------|-------------|
| **Rig** | Project environment | Infrastructure | An isolated workspace with its own git clone, merge queue, and worker pool. Each project gets its own rig. |
| **Polecat** | Transient worker agent | Agents | A short-lived AI coding agent that picks up a bead, executes the work, and terminates when done. The primary unit of parallel execution. |
| **Witness** | Agent supervisor | Supervision | Monitors running polecats for crashes, stalls, and failures. Restarts or escalates when something goes wrong. |
| **Refinery** | Merge queue | Infrastructure | Serializes parallel agent output into clean, validated commits on main. Ensures no merge conflicts or broken builds. |
| **Bead** | Work item | Work Tracking | A lightweight issue or task, stored in Dolt alongside your code. Beads are what agents pick up and work on. |
| **Convoy** | Batch tracker | Work Tracking | Groups multiple beads into a single trackable unit. Auto-closes when all beads in the batch complete. |
| **Molecule** | Workflow instance | Execution | A live, running workflow created by "pouring" a formula. Tracks which steps are done, in progress, or pending. |
| **Mayor** | Top-level orchestrator | Supervision | Decomposes high-level intents into beads, manages convoys, and oversees the entire agent hierarchy. |

## Core Architecture

Under the hood, Gas Town organizes work through several interlocking systems. **Rigs** are isolated project environments, each with their own git clone, merge queue, and worker pool. **Molecules** define multi-step workflows as state machines — they track which step each agent is on and what happens next. **Beads** provide lightweight issue tracking that lives alongside your code, powered by [Dolt](https://www.dolthub.com/) for versioned database storage.

The communication layer uses **mail** for asynchronous messages between agents and **nudge** for real-time wake-up signals. Combined with **hooks** that automatically assign work when agents start, this creates a self-propelling system where work flows continuously without human intervention.

The following diagram illustrates the supervision hierarchy that ensures reliability across the agent fleet.

```mermaid
graph TD
    DAEMON[Daemon: Go Process] --> DEACON[Deacon: Town Health]
    DEACON --> W1[Witness: Rig 1]
    DEACON --> W2[Witness: Rig 2]
    DEACON --> W3[Witness: Rig N]
    W1 --> P1[Polecats: Workers]
    W2 --> P2[Polecats: Workers]
    W3 --> P3[Polecats: Workers]
    DEACON --> BOOT[Boot: Triage]
    BOOT -.->|monitors| DEACON
```

For a deeper look at the architecture, see the [Architecture Overview](/docs/architecture/overview) and [Design Principles](/docs/architecture/design-principles).

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Rig["Project Rig"]
        B[Beads: Issue Tracking]
        M[Molecules: Workflows]
        MQ[Merge Queue]
        CR[Crew: Persistent Workers]
        PC[Polecats: Transient Workers]
    end
    subgraph Comms["Communication"]
        ML[Mail: Async Messages]
        NG[Nudge: Real-time Wakeup]
        HK[Hooks: Auto-assignment]
    end
    Comms --> Rig
```

:::warning Start with Good Test Coverage
Gas Town agents validate their own work by running your test suite. If your test coverage is low or your tests are unreliable, agents will land broken code on main or waste tokens retrying flaky failures. Invest in solid test infrastructure before scaling beyond a single agent -- it pays for itself many times over in reduced debugging and rework.
:::

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Install: gt install
    Install --> Configure: gt rig create
    Configure --> SingleAgent: Run 1 polecat
    SingleAgent --> MultiAgent: Scale to 3-5
    MultiAgent --> FullFleet: Scale to 10-30
    FullFleet --> Autonomous: Mayor-driven
    Autonomous --> [*]
```

:::tip Start Small and Scale Gradually
Most successful Gas Town deployments begin with a single rig and two or three polecats. This lets you validate your test suite, learn the supervision hierarchy, and build confidence before scaling to a full fleet. The [Eight Stages](/blog/eight-stages-self-assessment) guide helps you identify your current maturity level and plan the next step.
:::

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph Communication["Agent Communication Layer"]
        MAIL[Mail: Async Messages]
        NUDGE[Nudge: Wake Signals]
        HOOK[Hook: Work Assignment]
    end
    subgraph Storage["Persistence Layer"]
        BEADS[Beads: Issue Tracking]
        DOLT[Dolt: Versioned DB]
    end
    Communication --> Storage
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant M as Mayor
    participant B as Beads
    participant P as Polecat
    participant R as Refinery
    participant G as Main Branch
    H->>M: Describe intent
    M->>B: Create beads + convoy
    M->>P: Sling beads to workers
    P->>P: Execute in parallel
    P->>R: Submit merge requests
    R->>R: Rebase + validate + test
    R->>G: Fast-forward merge
    Note over G: Clean linear history
```

## Who Is Gas Town For?

Gas Town is designed for developers and teams who:

- **Already use AI coding agents** and want to scale from one agent to many without chaos
- **Work on large codebases** where multiple areas can be developed in parallel
- **Need predictable delivery** — convoy tracking and merge queue give visibility into progress
- **Want autonomous operation** — Gas Town runs while you sleep, handling failures and retries automatically

For human developers working alongside agents, the [crew workflow](/blog/crew-workflow) provides persistent workspaces and direct push access to main.

:::info You Don't Need 30 Agents to Benefit
Even with 2-3 concurrent polecats, Gas Town's Refinery and Witness prevent the coordination headaches of running agents ad-hoc. The system scales smoothly from a single agent to a full fleet, so start small and grow as you learn the patterns.
:::

You don't need to be running 30 agents to benefit. Even with 2-3 concurrent workers, Gas Town's Refinery and Witness dramatically reduce the manual coordination overhead compared to running agents ad-hoc. For a complete reference of all available commands, see the [CLI reference](/docs/cli-reference/town).

:::note Gas Town is runtime-agnostic
While Gas Town was built on Claude Code, the [multi-runtime support](/docs/guides/multi-runtime) means you can use other AI coding tools as polecats. The orchestration layer — beads, convoys, Refinery, supervision — works the same regardless of which LLM powers your agents.
:::

## Getting Started

If you're new here, check out the [Getting Started guide](/docs/getting-started/) to install Gas Town and run your first convoy. The [Quick Start](/docs/getting-started/quickstart/) will have you up and running in about 10 minutes.

For the full documentation, visit the [docs home](/docs/). If you prefer to learn by example, the [Usage Guide](/docs/guides/usage-guide/) walks through day-to-day workflows in detail. The [Cheat Sheet](/docs/getting-started/cheat-sheet) provides a handy reference for the most common commands.

:::caution Backup Your Work Before First Convoy
Before running your first convoy with real agents working in parallel, ensure you have a clean git history and push all important work. While Gas Town's merge queue prevents conflicts, the first convoy is the best time to learn the system's behavior without risking critical work in progress.
:::

We also recommend reading the [Eight Stages of Gas Town Maturity](/blog/eight-stages-self-assessment) to understand where you are on the learning curve and what to focus on next. For hands-on learners, the [First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy) tutorial walks through the full create-sling-merge cycle in about five minutes.

### Gas Town Component Interactions

The following diagram illustrates how the major Gas Town components interact during a typical work cycle from bead creation to merge completion.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant BD as Beads System
    participant PC as Polecat
    participant RF as Refinery
    participant W as Witness
    participant M as Main Branch

    H->>BD: Create bead
    H->>PC: Sling to polecat
    PC->>PC: Execute work
    W->>PC: Monitor health
    PC->>RF: Submit to merge queue
    RF->>RF: Validate and test
    RF->>M: Merge to main
    M-->>H: Work complete
```

Stay tuned for more posts on workflow patterns, operational tips, and deep dives into Gas Town's internals.

- [Using Search](/docs/getting-started/using-search) — How to search across Gas Town documentation
- [Glossary](/docs/guides/glossary) — Definitions for all Gas Town terminology
- [Workspace CLI Reference](/docs/cli-reference/workspace) — Commands for installing, enabling, and managing your Gas Town workspace
- [Why Beads?](/blog/why-beads) — Understanding the bead-based issue tracking system that powers Gas Town workflows
