blog/2026-02-13-molecules-and-formulas.md, before:

---
title: "Molecules and Formulas: Gas Town's Workflow Engine"
description: "How molecules track multi-step agent workflows with crash-safe progress, and how formulas define reusable workflow templates in TOML."
slug: molecules-and-formulas
authors: [gastown]
tags: [architecture, concepts, molecules, formulas, workflows]
---

Every Gas Town agent follows a workflow. A polecat doesn't just "fix the bug" — it loads context, sets up a branch, runs preflight tests, implements the fix, self-reviews, runs tests again, and submits to the merge queue managed by the [refinery](/blog/refinery-deep-dive). Molecules are how Gas Town tracks progress through these multi-step workflows, and formulas are the templates that define them.

<!-- truncate -->

## The Class-Instance Relationship

The relationship between formulas and molecules is like classes and objects:

| Concept | What It Is | Where It Lives |
|---------|-----------|---------------|
| **Formula** | A TOML template defining steps, dependencies, and variables | `.beads/formulas/*.formula.toml` |
| **Molecule** | A running instance of a formula, tracking real progress | Bead in the beads database |

The following diagram illustrates the class-instance relationship:

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph Templates["Formulas (Classes)"]
        F1[shiny.formula.toml]
        F2[release.formula.toml]
        F3[patrol.formula.toml]
    end
    subgraph Instances["Molecules (Objects)"]
        M1[mol-shiny-abc1]
        M2[mol-shiny-abc2]
        M3[mol-release-v2]
        M4[mol-patrol-001]
    end
    F1 -->|pour| M1
    F1 -->|pour| M2
    F2 -->|pour| M3
    F3 -->|pour| M4
```

You **pour** a formula to create a molecule:

```bash
gt formula run shiny --bead gt-abc12
# Creates a molecule instance with steps tracking progress
```

Multiple molecules can be poured from the same formula simultaneously. Three polecats can each be running their own instance of the `shiny` formula — each molecule tracks its own progress independently. For advanced multi-molecule coordination, see [Your Second Convoy](/blog/your-second-convoy).

:::caution[Molecules Add Overhead — Use Them When You Need Step Tracking]
Every molecule step creates a wisp bead in the database, adding storage and I/O overhead. For trivial tasks that complete in one session without risk of crashing mid-workflow, consider using ad-hoc instructions instead of pouring a formula. Reserve molecules for workflows with meaningful crash risk or multi-step dependencies that justify the tracking cost.
:::

## Why Molecules Exist

Without molecules, a polecat gets a bead and... does whatever it wants. Maybe it forgets to run tests. Maybe it pushes without self-reviewing. Maybe it crashes halfway through and the next session doesn't know which steps were already done.

Molecules solve three problems:

### 1. Crash-Safe Progress

Each step in a molecule is tracked as a sub-bead (wisp). When a polecat completes a step, the molecule updates in the [beads database](/docs/concepts/beads). If the polecat crashes:

```text
Step: load-context    ✓  (done)
Step: branch-setup    ✓  (done)
Step: preflight-tests ✓  (done)
Step: implement       ●  (in progress - was working when crash happened)
Step: self-review     ○  (pending)
Step: run-tests       ○  (pending)
Step: submit          ○  (pending)
```

The next session reads the molecule and picks up from `implement` — it doesn't re-run `load-context` or `branch-setup`. This is the molecule's killer feature: **progress survives crashes, handoffs, and context compaction**. This crash-safe tracking relies on the [hook system](/docs/concepts/hooks) to preserve work assignments across restarts.

### 2. Enforced Step Ordering

The formula declares dependencies between steps:

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[load-context] --> B[branch-setup]
    B --> C[preflight-tests]
    C --> D[implement]
    D --> E[self-review]
    E --> F[run-tests]
    F --> G[submit-and-exit]
```

A polecat can't skip `preflight-tests` and jump straight to `implement`. The molecule won't advance until dependencies are satisfied. This enforces quality without relying on the agent to remember the correct order.

### 3. Reusable Workflow Patterns

Gas Town ships with 30+ built-in formulas:

| Formula | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `shiny` | Standard polecat work (implement a bead) |
| `code-review` | Parallel multi-perspective code review |
| `mol-witness-patrol` | Witness monitoring cycle |
| `mol-refinery-patrol` | Refinery merge cycle |
| `fix-and-verify` | Fix + automated verification |

Each formula encodes best practices for its workflow. The `shiny` formula ensures polecats always run preflight tests, self-review their code, and run the test suite before submitting. These steps aren't suggestions — they're enforced by the molecule. For more on enforcing quality standards, see [Design Principles](/docs/architecture/design-principles).

## Inside a Formula

A formula is a TOML file that defines steps, their dependencies, and any variables:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Formula["Formula TOML"]
        S1[Step: load-context]
        S2[Step: branch-setup]
        S3[Step: implement]
        S4[Step: test]
    end
    subgraph Molecule["Molecule Instance"]
        W1["Wisp: load-context ✓"]
        W2["Wisp: branch-setup ✓"]
        W3["Wisp: implement ●"]
        W4["Wisp: test ○"]
    end
    S1 --> W1
    S2 --> W2
    S3 --> W3
    S4 --> W4
    W1 -->|depends on| W2
    W2 -->|depends on| W3
    W3 -->|depends on| W4
```

```toml
[formula]
name = "shiny"
description = "Standard polecat work formula"
version = "1.0"

[[steps]]
id = "load-context"
description = "Read the bead and understand the task"

[[steps]]
id = "branch-setup"
description = "Create feature branch from latest main"
needs = ["load-context"]

[[steps]]
id = "preflight-tests"
description = "Run tests to establish baseline"
needs = ["branch-setup"]

[[steps]]
id = "implement"
description = "Implement the changes"
needs = ["preflight-tests"]

[[steps]]
id = "self-review"
description = "Review your own changes for issues"
needs = ["implement"]

[[steps]]
id = "run-tests"
description = "Run tests to verify changes"
needs = ["self-review"]

[[steps]]
id = "submit-and-exit"
description = "Push branch and call gt done"
needs = ["run-tests"]
```

:::danger[Formula DAGs Must Be Acyclic]
The `needs` field defines dependencies between steps, forming a directed acyclic graph. If you accidentally create a cycle (e.g., step A needs B, step B needs C, step C needs A), the molecule will deadlock and the agent will never progress. Gas Town validates formulas when you pour them, but always double-check dependency chains when writing custom formulas with `gt formula validate <name>`.
:::

The `needs` field creates a DAG (directed acyclic graph) of step dependencies. Steps without `needs` can run immediately. Steps with `needs` wait until all dependencies complete.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    F[Formula TOML] -->|pour| M[Molecule Instance]
    M --> W1["wisp: load-context ✓"]
    M --> W2["wisp: implement ●"]
    M --> W3["wisp: test ○"]
    M --> W4["wisp: submit ○"]
```

:::note Progress Survives Everything
The molecule's killer feature is crash-safe step tracking. When a polecat crashes mid-workflow, the next session reads the molecule state and skips completed steps entirely — it does not re-run `load-context` or `branch-setup`. This means crashes, handoffs, and context compaction cost you only the in-progress step, not the entire workflow.
:::

:::tip Custom Formulas Live in .beads/formulas/
You can create project-specific formulas by saving TOML files to `.beads/formulas/<name>.formula.toml`. These are available immediately via `gt formula run <name>` and can be poured alongside the built-in formulas. Start by copying an existing formula like `shiny` and customizing the steps for your project's workflow.
:::

## Two Kinds of Molecules

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Poured: gt formula run
    Poured --> Step1: First Step Begins
    Step1 --> Step2: Step Complete
    Step2 --> StepN: Dependencies Satisfied
    StepN --> Completed: All Steps Done
    Completed --> [*]: Work Molecule Ends

    state "Patrol Loop" as PL {
        [*] --> Patrol: Pour Patrol Molecule
        Patrol --> Check: Run Checks
        Check --> Report: Summarize Findings
        Report --> [*]: Cycle Complete
    }
    Completed --> PL: If Patrol Type
```

Gas Town uses molecules for two distinct purposes:

### Work Molecules

Guide a polecat through a single task. Poured when a polecat starts working on a bead. The `shiny` formula is the default work molecule — it takes the polecat from "read the task" to "submit the result."

:::caution Work Molecules and Patrol Molecules Should Never Share a Formula
Work molecules run once and complete, while patrol molecules loop indefinitely. If you accidentally pour a patrol formula for a polecat task (or vice versa), the agent will either exit prematurely or loop forever. Always verify the formula type with `gt formula show <name>` before pouring.
:::

### Patrol Molecules

Guide persistent agents through recurring monitoring cycles. The Witness runs `mol-witness-patrol` in a loop — each cycle checks polecat health, evaluates gates, handles completions, and patrols for issues. When the patrol completes, a new one is immediately poured.

The difference: work molecules run once and complete. Patrol molecules loop forever.

## Monitoring Molecules

You can check a molecule's progress at any time:

```bash
gt mol status
```

```text
Molecule: mol-shiny-abc12
Formula: shiny
Status: in_progress
Steps:
  ✓ load-context
  ✓ branch-setup
  ✓ preflight-tests
  ● implement         (current)
  ○ self-review
  ○ run-tests
  ○ submit-and-exit
```

For patrol agents, molecule status shows the current patrol cycle:

```bash
gt mol status --rig myproject --agent witness
```

## Building Custom Formulas

You can create custom formulas for your project's specific workflows. For example, a release formula:

```toml
[formula]
name = "release"
description = "Release preparation workflow"

[[steps]]
id = "version-bump"
description = "Update version numbers"

[[steps]]
id = "changelog"
description = "Generate changelog from recent beads"
needs = ["version-bump"]

[[steps]]
id = "full-test"
description = "Run complete test suite"
needs = ["changelog"]

[[steps]]
id = "build"
description = "Build release artifacts"
needs = ["full-test"]

[[steps]]
id = "tag-and-push"
description = "Git tag and push"
needs = ["build"]
```

Save this as `.beads/formulas/release.formula.toml` and pour it:

```bash
gt formula run release
```

:::warning Do Not Manually Edit Molecule State in the Beads Database
Molecule progress is managed by the agent through `gt mol` commands. Directly editing wisp states in the `.beads/` database can put the molecule into an inconsistent state where completed steps appear pending or vice versa, causing the agent to skip work or repeat it. If a molecule is stuck, use `gt mol reset` to cleanly restart from a known step rather than hand-editing the underlying beads.
:::

```mermaid
pie title Molecule Step Time Distribution (Typical Shiny)
    "load-context" : 10
    "branch-setup" : 5
    "preflight-tests" : 15
    "implement" : 40
    "self-review" : 10
    "run-tests" : 15
    "submit-and-exit" : 5
```

## The MEOW Stack Connection

Molecules are one layer in the MEOW Stack (**M**olecules, **E**pics, **O**rchestration, **W**orkflows). Individual molecules handle single-agent workflows. At higher layers, convoys coordinate multiple molecules across agents, and protomolecules orchestrate complex multi-agent operations.

But molecules are the foundation. Without crash-safe step tracking, none of the higher layers would work — a single agent crash would cascade into convoy failures and orchestration breakdowns.

## The MEOW Stack Hierarchy

Molecules form the base layer of Gas Town's workflow architecture, supporting increasingly complex orchestration patterns:

```mermaid
graph BT
    M[Molecules: Single-Agent Workflows] --> E[Episodes: Multi-Agent Sequences]
    E --> C[Convoys: Batch Coordination]
    C --> P[Protomolecules: Complex Orchestration]
    P --> W[MEOW: Full Automation]
    style M fill:#e1f5ff
    style E fill:#c2ebff
    style C fill:#a3e0ff
    style P fill:#84d5ff
    style W fill:#65cbff
```

:::warning Editing a Formula Does Not Update Running Molecules
If you modify a formula's TOML file (e.g., adding a new step or changing dependencies), molecules that are already poured from the old version continue using the old definition. Changes only apply to new molecules poured after the edit. To apply formula changes to in-flight work, you must reset the molecule with `gt mol reset` and restart from the beginning.
:::

## Next Steps

- [Molecules & Formulas Reference](/docs/concepts/molecules) — Full reference with all step states, variables, and advanced features
- [The MEOW Stack](/docs/concepts/meow-stack) — How molecules fit into Gas Town's layered workflow architecture
- [Formula Workflow](/docs/workflows/formula-workflow) — Operational guide to running formula-based workflows
- [Wisps](/docs/concepts/wisps) — The sub-bead primitives that track individual molecule step completion
- [Workflow Architecture](/docs/architecture/overview) — How formulas and molecules fit into the system design
- [Building Your First Custom Formula](/blog/custom-formulas) — Step-by-step guide to creating TOML formulas
- [Formula Design Patterns](/blog/formula-design-patterns) — Advanced patterns for multi-step workflows
- [Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns) — How formulas fit into the broader work distribution strategy
- [Hook-Driven Architecture](/blog/hook-driven-architecture) — How molecules track step-level progress through the hook system
- [Code Review Workflow](/blog/code-review-workflow) — How the code review formula leverages molecules for multi-perspective review
- [Refinery Deep Dive](/blog/refinery-deep-dive) — How the Refinery processes molecules submitted through gt done

Commit message:

Raise test 43 threshold: blog Mermaid diagrams from 7 to 8

blog/2026-02-13-molecules-and-formulas.md, after:

---
title: "Molecules and Formulas: Gas Town's Workflow Engine"
description: "How molecules track multi-step agent workflows with crash-safe progress, and how formulas define reusable workflow templates in TOML."
slug: molecules-and-formulas
authors: [gastown]
tags: [architecture, concepts, molecules, formulas, workflows]
---

Every Gas Town agent follows a workflow. A polecat doesn't just "fix the bug" — it loads context, sets up a branch, runs preflight tests, implements the fix, self-reviews, runs tests again, and submits to the merge queue managed by the [refinery](/blog/refinery-deep-dive). Molecules are how Gas Town tracks progress through these multi-step workflows, and formulas are the templates that define them.

<!-- truncate -->

## The Class-Instance Relationship

The relationship between formulas and molecules is like classes and objects:

| Concept | What It Is | Where It Lives |
|---------|-----------|---------------|
| **Formula** | A TOML template defining steps, dependencies, and variables | `.beads/formulas/*.formula.toml` |
| **Molecule** | A running instance of a formula, tracking real progress | Bead in the beads database |

The following diagram illustrates the class-instance relationship:

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph Templates["Formulas (Classes)"]
        F1[shiny.formula.toml]
        F2[release.formula.toml]
        F3[patrol.formula.toml]
    end
    subgraph Instances["Molecules (Objects)"]
        M1[mol-shiny-abc1]
        M2[mol-shiny-abc2]
        M3[mol-release-v2]
        M4[mol-patrol-001]
    end
    F1 -->|pour| M1
    F1 -->|pour| M2
    F2 -->|pour| M3
    F3 -->|pour| M4
```

You **pour** a formula to create a molecule:

```bash
gt formula run shiny --bead gt-abc12
# Creates a molecule instance with steps tracking progress
```

Multiple molecules can be poured from the same formula simultaneously. Three polecats can each be running their own instance of the `shiny` formula — each molecule tracks its own progress independently. For advanced multi-molecule coordination, see [Your Second Convoy](/blog/your-second-convoy).

:::caution[Molecules Add Overhead — Use Them When You Need Step Tracking]
Every molecule step creates a wisp bead in the database, adding storage and I/O overhead. For trivial tasks that complete in one session without risk of crashing mid-workflow, consider using ad-hoc instructions instead of pouring a formula. Reserve molecules for workflows with meaningful crash risk or multi-step dependencies that justify the tracking cost.
:::

## Why Molecules Exist

Without molecules, a polecat gets a bead and... does whatever it wants. Maybe it forgets to run tests. Maybe it pushes without self-reviewing. Maybe it crashes halfway through and the next session doesn't know which steps were already done.

Molecules solve three problems:

### 1. Crash-Safe Progress

Each step in a molecule is tracked as a sub-bead (wisp). When a polecat completes a step, the molecule updates in the [beads database](/docs/concepts/beads). If the polecat crashes:

```text
Step: load-context    ✓  (done)
Step: branch-setup    ✓  (done)
Step: preflight-tests ✓  (done)
Step: implement       ●  (in progress - was working when crash happened)
Step: self-review     ○  (pending)
Step: run-tests       ○  (pending)
Step: submit          ○  (pending)
```

The next session reads the molecule and picks up from `implement` — it doesn't re-run `load-context` or `branch-setup`. This is the molecule's killer feature: **progress survives crashes, handoffs, and context compaction**. This crash-safe tracking relies on the [hook system](/docs/concepts/hooks) to preserve work assignments across restarts.

### 2. Enforced Step Ordering

The formula declares dependencies between steps:

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[load-context] --> B[branch-setup]
    B --> C[preflight-tests]
    C --> D[implement]
    D --> E[self-review]
    E --> F[run-tests]
    F --> G[submit-and-exit]
```

A polecat can't skip `preflight-tests` and jump straight to `implement`. The molecule won't advance until dependencies are satisfied. This enforces quality without relying on the agent to remember the correct order.

### 3. Reusable Workflow Patterns

Gas Town ships with 30+ built-in formulas:

| Formula | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `shiny` | Standard polecat work (implement a bead) |
| `code-review` | Parallel multi-perspective code review |
| `mol-witness-patrol` | Witness monitoring cycle |
| `mol-refinery-patrol` | Refinery merge cycle |
| `fix-and-verify` | Fix + automated verification |

Each formula encodes best practices for its workflow. The `shiny` formula ensures polecats always run preflight tests, self-review their code, and run the test suite before submitting. These steps aren't suggestions — they're enforced by the molecule. For more on enforcing quality standards, see [Design Principles](/docs/architecture/design-principles).

## Inside a Formula

A formula is a TOML file that defines steps, their dependencies, and any variables:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Formula["Formula TOML"]
        S1[Step: load-context]
        S2[Step: branch-setup]
        S3[Step: implement]
        S4[Step: test]
    end
    subgraph Molecule["Molecule Instance"]
        W1["Wisp: load-context ✓"]
        W2["Wisp: branch-setup ✓"]
        W3["Wisp: implement ●"]
        W4["Wisp: test ○"]
    end
    S1 --> W1
    S2 --> W2
    S3 --> W3
    S4 --> W4
    W1 -->|depends on| W2
    W2 -->|depends on| W3
    W3 -->|depends on| W4
```

```toml
[formula]
name = "shiny"
description = "Standard polecat work formula"
version = "1.0"

[[steps]]
id = "load-context"
description = "Read the bead and understand the task"

[[steps]]
id = "branch-setup"
description = "Create feature branch from latest main"
needs = ["load-context"]

[[steps]]
id = "preflight-tests"
description = "Run tests to establish baseline"
needs = ["branch-setup"]

[[steps]]
id = "implement"
description = "Implement the changes"
needs = ["preflight-tests"]

[[steps]]
id = "self-review"
description = "Review your own changes for issues"
needs = ["implement"]

[[steps]]
id = "run-tests"
description = "Run tests to verify changes"
needs = ["self-review"]

[[steps]]
id = "submit-and-exit"
description = "Push branch and call gt done"
needs = ["run-tests"]
```

:::danger[Formula DAGs Must Be Acyclic]
The `needs` field defines dependencies between steps, forming a directed acyclic graph. If you accidentally create a cycle (e.g., step A needs B, step B needs C, step C needs A), the molecule will deadlock and the agent will never progress. Gas Town validates formulas when you pour them, but always double-check dependency chains when writing custom formulas with `gt formula validate <name>`.
:::

The `needs` field creates a DAG (directed acyclic graph) of step dependencies. Steps without `needs` can run immediately. Steps with `needs` wait until all dependencies complete.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    F[Formula TOML] -->|pour| M[Molecule Instance]
    M --> W1["wisp: load-context ✓"]
    M --> W2["wisp: implement ●"]
    M --> W3["wisp: test ○"]
    M --> W4["wisp: submit ○"]
```

:::note Progress Survives Everything
The molecule's killer feature is crash-safe step tracking. When a polecat crashes mid-workflow, the next session reads the molecule state and skips completed steps entirely — it does not re-run `load-context` or `branch-setup`. This means crashes, handoffs, and context compaction cost you only the in-progress step, not the entire workflow.
:::

:::tip Custom Formulas Live in .beads/formulas/
You can create project-specific formulas by saving TOML files to `.beads/formulas/<name>.formula.toml`. These are available immediately via `gt formula run <name>` and can be poured alongside the built-in formulas. Start by copying an existing formula like `shiny` and customizing the steps for your project's workflow.
:::

## Two Kinds of Molecules

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Poured: gt formula run
    Poured --> Step1: First Step Begins
    Step1 --> Step2: Step Complete
    Step2 --> StepN: Dependencies Satisfied
    StepN --> Completed: All Steps Done
    Completed --> [*]: Work Molecule Ends

    state "Patrol Loop" as PL {
        [*] --> Patrol: Pour Patrol Molecule
        Patrol --> Check: Run Checks
        Check --> Report: Summarize Findings
        Report --> [*]: Cycle Complete
    }
    Completed --> PL: If Patrol Type
```

Gas Town uses molecules for two distinct purposes:

### Work Molecules

Guide a polecat through a single task. Poured when a polecat starts working on a bead. The `shiny` formula is the default work molecule — it takes the polecat from "read the task" to "submit the result."

:::caution Work Molecules and Patrol Molecules Should Never Share a Formula
Work molecules run once and complete, while patrol molecules loop indefinitely. If you accidentally pour a patrol formula for a polecat task (or vice versa), the agent will either exit prematurely or loop forever. Always verify the formula type with `gt formula show <name>` before pouring.
:::

### Patrol Molecules

Guide persistent agents through recurring monitoring cycles. The Witness runs `mol-witness-patrol` in a loop — each cycle checks polecat health, evaluates gates, handles completions, and patrols for issues. When the patrol completes, a new one is immediately poured.

The difference: work molecules run once and complete. Patrol molecules loop forever.

## Monitoring Molecules

You can check a molecule's progress at any time:

```bash
gt mol status
```

```text
Molecule: mol-shiny-abc12
Formula: shiny
Status: in_progress
Steps:
  ✓ load-context
  ✓ branch-setup
  ✓ preflight-tests
  ● implement         (current)
  ○ self-review
  ○ run-tests
  ○ submit-and-exit
```

For patrol agents, molecule status shows the current patrol cycle:

```bash
gt mol status --rig myproject --agent witness
```

## Building Custom Formulas

You can create custom formulas for your project's specific workflows. For example, a release formula:

```toml
[formula]
name = "release"
description = "Release preparation workflow"

[[steps]]
id = "version-bump"
description = "Update version numbers"

[[steps]]
id = "changelog"
description = "Generate changelog from recent beads"
needs = ["version-bump"]

[[steps]]
id = "full-test"
description = "Run complete test suite"
needs = ["changelog"]

[[steps]]
id = "build"
description = "Build release artifacts"
needs = ["full-test"]

[[steps]]
id = "tag-and-push"
description = "Git tag and push"
needs = ["build"]
```

Save this as `.beads/formulas/release.formula.toml` and pour it:

```bash
gt formula run release
```

:::warning Do Not Manually Edit Molecule State in the Beads Database
Molecule progress is managed by the agent through `gt mol` commands. Directly editing wisp states in the `.beads/` database can put the molecule into an inconsistent state where completed steps appear pending or vice versa, causing the agent to skip work or repeat it. If a molecule is stuck, use `gt mol reset` to cleanly restart from a known step rather than hand-editing the underlying beads.
:::

```mermaid
pie title Molecule Step Time Distribution (Typical Shiny)
    "load-context" : 10
    "branch-setup" : 5
    "preflight-tests" : 15
    "implement" : 40
    "self-review" : 10
    "run-tests" : 15
    "submit-and-exit" : 5
```

## The MEOW Stack Connection

Molecules are one layer in the MEOW Stack (**M**olecules, **E**pics, **O**rchestration, **W**orkflows). Individual molecules handle single-agent workflows. At higher layers, convoys coordinate multiple molecules across agents, and protomolecules orchestrate complex multi-agent operations.

But molecules are the foundation. Without crash-safe step tracking, none of the higher layers would work — a single agent crash would cascade into convoy failures and orchestration breakdowns.

## The MEOW Stack Hierarchy

Molecules form the base layer of Gas Town's workflow architecture, supporting increasingly complex orchestration patterns:

```mermaid
graph BT
    M[Molecules: Single-Agent Workflows] --> E[Episodes: Multi-Agent Sequences]
    E --> C[Convoys: Batch Coordination]
    C --> P[Protomolecules: Complex Orchestration]
    P --> W[MEOW: Full Automation]
    style M fill:#e1f5ff
    style E fill:#c2ebff
    style C fill:#a3e0ff
    style P fill:#84d5ff
    style W fill:#65cbff
```

:::warning Editing a Formula Does Not Update Running Molecules
If you modify a formula's TOML file (e.g., adding a new step or changing dependencies), molecules that are already poured from the old version continue using the old definition. Changes only apply to new molecules poured after the edit. To apply formula changes to in-flight work, you must reset the molecule with `gt mol reset` and restart from the beginning.
:::

### Formula to Molecule Instantiation

The process of pouring a formula creates a live molecule instance with tracked state:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant F as Formula TOML
    participant GT as gt formula run
    participant M as Molecule Instance
    participant W as Wisp Beads
    participant A as Agent

    F->>GT: Load formula definition
    GT->>M: Create molecule bead
    M->>W: Create wisp for each step
    W->>W: Set initial state: pending
    GT->>A: Attach molecule to hook
    A->>W: Execute step 1
    W->>W: Update state: completed
    A->>W: Execute step 2
    W->>W: Update state: in_progress
```

## Next Steps

- [Molecules & Formulas Reference](/docs/concepts/molecules) — Full reference with all step states, variables, and advanced features
- [The MEOW Stack](/docs/concepts/meow-stack) — How molecules fit into Gas Town's layered workflow architecture
- [Formula Workflow](/docs/workflows/formula-workflow) — Operational guide to running formula-based workflows
- [Wisps](/docs/concepts/wisps) — The sub-bead primitives that track individual molecule step completion
- [Workflow Architecture](/docs/architecture/overview) — How formulas and molecules fit into the system design
- [Building Your First Custom Formula](/blog/custom-formulas) — Step-by-step guide to creating TOML formulas
- [Formula Design Patterns](/blog/formula-design-patterns) — Advanced patterns for multi-step workflows
- [Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns) — How formulas fit into the broader work distribution strategy
- [Hook-Driven Architecture](/blog/hook-driven-architecture) — How molecules track step-level progress through the hook system
- [Code Review Workflow](/blog/code-review-workflow) — How the code review formula leverages molecules for multi-perspective review
- [Refinery Deep Dive](/blog/refinery-deep-dive) — How the Refinery processes molecules submitted through gt done
