blog/2026-02-13-custom-formulas.md, before:

---
title: "Building Your First Custom Formula"
description: "Step-by-step guide to creating TOML formulas that define custom agent workflows for specialized tasks in Gas Town."
slug: custom-formulas
authors: [gastown]
tags: [tutorial, formulas, molecules, customization]
---

Gas Town ships with built-in formulas for common workflows, but the real power comes from writing your own. Custom formulas let you define exactly how agents handle your specific tasks — from code review pipelines to database migration workflows.

<!-- truncate -->

## What's a Formula?

A formula is a TOML file that defines a sequence of steps for an agent to follow. When work gets assigned, Gas Town "pours" the formula into a molecule — a live workflow instance that tracks progress through each step.

```text
Formula (TOML template)  →  pour  →  Molecule (running workflow)
```

The key benefit: if an agent crashes mid-workflow, the molecule remembers which steps completed. The next agent picks up exactly where the last one left off. This persistence is powered by [GUPP](/blog/understanding-gupp), Gas Town's propulsion principle.

:::tip Crash Recovery Is Built In
Because each step's completion is recorded in the molecule, you never lose progress when an agent crashes. The next agent that picks up the work skips all completed steps and resumes from the exact point of failure. Design your steps as discrete, independently completable units to maximize this benefit.
:::

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    F[Formula TOML] -->|pour| M[Molecule]
    M --> W1[Wisp: Step 1]
    M --> W2[Wisp: Step 2]
    M --> W3[Wisp: Step N]
    W1 -->|done| W2
    W2 -->|done| W3
```

## Anatomy of a Formula

Every formula lives in `.beads/formulas/` and follows this structure:

```toml
[formula]
id = "my-custom-workflow"
name = "My Custom Workflow"
description = "What this workflow does"
version = "1.0.0"

[[steps]]
id = "step-1"
title = "First step"
description = """
Detailed instructions for the agent.
This is what the agent reads to know what to do.
"""

[[steps]]
id = "step-2"
title = "Second step"
needs = ["step-1"]
description = """
This step runs after step-1 completes.
"""
```

The following chart breaks down the typical components of a production formula by complexity.

```mermaid
pie title Formula Component Breakdown
    "Step Descriptions" : 50
    "Dependencies (needs)" : 20
    "Variables" : 15
    "Gates" : 10
    "Metadata" : 5
```

The following table summarizes all the configuration fields available in a formula TOML file:

| Field | Section | Required | Purpose |
|-------|---------|----------|---------|
| `id` | `[formula]` | Yes | Unique identifier used to reference the formula when pouring molecules (e.g., `code-review`) |
| `name` | `[formula]` | Yes | Human-readable display name shown in listings and status output |
| `description` | `[formula]` | No | Explains what the formula does; helps users choose the right formula |
| `version` | `[formula]` | No | Tracks which formula revision produced a given molecule; bump on changes |
| `id` | `[[steps]]` | Yes | Unique step identifier that appears in logs, status, and dependency declarations |
| `title` | `[[steps]]` | Yes | Short summary of what the step does, displayed in `gt mol status` |
| `description` | `[[steps]]` | Yes | Detailed instructions the agent reads to execute the step; supports markdown and code blocks |
| `needs` | `[[steps]]` | No | Array of step IDs that must complete before this step starts (e.g., `["step-1"]`) |
| `gate` | `[[steps]]` | No | Set to `true` to pause the workflow at this step until an external condition is met |
| `gate_type` | `[[steps]]` | No | Specifies the type of external gate (e.g., `gh:run` for GitHub Actions); used with `gate = true` |

The `needs` field creates dependencies — step-2 won't start until step-1 is done.

## Example: Code Review Formula

Let's build a formula that guides an agent through a structured code review:

```toml
[formula]
id = "code-review"
name = "Structured Code Review"
description = "Systematic code review with security, performance, and style checks"
version = "1.0.0"

[[steps]]
id = "load-context"
title = "Load PR context"
description = """
Read the PR description and all changed files.
Understand the intent of the changes before reviewing.

```bash
gh pr view {{pr_number}} --json title,body,files
gh pr diff {{pr_number}}
```

Note the files changed, the PR title, and any linked issues.
"""

[[steps]]
id = "security-review"
title = "Security review"
needs = ["load-context"]
description = """
Check all changed files for security issues:
- SQL injection risks (unsanitized input in queries)
- XSS vulnerabilities (unescaped output in templates)
- Authentication/authorization bypasses
- Secrets or credentials in code
- Unsafe deserialization

If you find issues, add them to your review notes with severity.
"""

[[steps]]
id = "performance-review"
title = "Performance review"
needs = ["load-context"]
description = """
Check for performance issues:
- N+1 query patterns
- Missing database indexes for new queries
- Unbounded loops or recursion
- Large allocations in hot paths
- Missing pagination on list endpoints

Note: this step runs in parallel with security-review since both
only depend on load-context.
"""

[[steps]]
id = "style-review"
title = "Style and consistency review"
needs = ["load-context"]
description = """
Check code style and consistency:
- Follows existing patterns in the codebase
- Consistent naming conventions
- Appropriate test coverage for new code
- Documentation for public APIs
- No dead code or commented-out blocks
"""

[[steps]]
id = "write-review"
title = "Write and submit review"
needs = ["security-review", "performance-review", "style-review"]
description = """
Compile findings from all review steps into a single PR review.
Categorize findings as:
- 🔴 Must fix (security issues, bugs)
- 🟡 Should fix (performance, maintainability)
- 🟢 Suggestion (style, optional improvements)

Submit the review via:
```bash
gh pr review {{pr_number}} --body "review content"
```
"""
```

Notice how `security-review`, `performance-review`, and `style-review` all depend only on `load-context`. In theory, they could run in parallel (though a single agent executes them sequentially).

```mermaid
graph TD
    WRITE[Write TOML Formula] --> REG[Register in .beads/formulas/]
    REG --> TEST[Test with gt mol pour --hook]
    TEST --> STEP[Step through manually]
    STEP --> OK{Steps correct?}
    OK -->|No| WRITE
    OK -->|Yes| DEPLOY[Deploy to polecats]
    DEPLOY --> POUR[gt mol pour in production]
```

:::danger Never Modify a Formula While Molecules Are Running
If you edit a formula TOML file while active molecules are using it, the running molecules will not pick up the changes -- but newly poured molecules will use the updated version. This creates inconsistency. Always wait for all in-flight molecules to complete or squash them before updating a formula, and bump the version field to track the change.
:::

## Variables with Double Braces

Formulas support `{{variable}}` placeholders that get filled when the molecule is poured:

```toml
[[steps]]
id = "checkout"
title = "Check out the target branch"
description = """
```bash
git checkout {{branch_name}}
git pull origin {{branch_name}}
```
"""
```

When you pour this formula, you provide the variable values:

```bash
gt mol pour code-review --var pr_number=42 --var branch_name=feature/auth
```

:::warning Variables Do Not Support Default Values
If a formula step references `{{variable_name}}` but you forget to provide `--var variable_name=value` when pouring the molecule, the step will fail when an agent encounters the unresolved placeholder. Gas Town does not support default values or optional variables. Always check the formula with `bd formula show <id>` to see which variables are required before pouring.
:::

:::caution Variables Are Not Validated Until Step Execution
The `gt mol pour` command accepts any variables you provide without checking if the formula actually uses them. Typos in variable names (like `--var prnumber=42` instead of `--var pr_number=42`) will only be caught when the agent reaches a step that references the undefined variable, wasting a session. Double-check variable names against the formula TOML before pouring.
:::


```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant U as User
    participant F as Formula TOML
    participant M as Molecule
    participant A as Agent

    U->>F: gt mol pour --var x=val
    F->>M: Pour with variables
    M->>M: Replace {{x}} with val
    M->>A: Assign to agent
    A->>M: Read step with resolved vars
    A->>A: Execute commands
    A->>M: Mark step done
```

:::info Missing Variables Cause Immediate Molecule Failure
If a formula references `{{variable_name}}` but you don't provide that variable when pouring the molecule with `--var variable_name=value`, the molecule will fail immediately when the agent encounters the unresolved placeholder. Always check the formula's variable requirements with `bd formula show <id>` before pouring to avoid wasted sessions.
:::

## Step Types: Gates and Pauses

Some workflows need to wait for external events. Use gates for this:

```toml
[[steps]]
id = "wait-for-ci"
title = "Wait for CI to pass"
gate = true
gate_type = "gh:run"
description = """
Create a gate and park. The Deacon will close this gate
when the GitHub Actions run completes.

```bash
bd gate create --type gh:run --run-id <run-id> --title "Wait for CI"
gt mol step park --gate <gate-id>
```
"""
```

When a step has `gate = true`, the agent parks the molecule at that step. The Deacon's patrol cycle checks whether the gate condition is met and resumes the workflow automatically. For a complete understanding of how gates enable asynchronous coordination, refer to the [gates documentation](/docs/concepts/gates).

## Registering Your Formula

Once you've written your formula, register it:

```bash
# Copy to the formulas directory
cp my-workflow.formula.toml .beads/formulas/

# List available formulas
bd formula list

# Pour it into a molecule for testing
gt mol pour my-custom-workflow --var key=value
```

For complex multi-rig deployments, you can combine formulas with [advanced convoy patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns) to orchestrate work across multiple repositories simultaneously. The [formula workflow guide](/docs/workflows/formula-workflow) provides operational best practices for running formulas in production.

## Testing Your Formula

Before deploying a formula to production polecats, test it manually:

```bash
# Pour and hook to yourself
gt mol pour code-review --var pr_number=1 --hook

# Check the molecule status
gt mol status

# Step through manually
gt mol step next    # Move to next step
gt mol step show    # See current step details
gt mol step done    # Mark current step complete
```

This lets you verify that:
1. Steps are in the right order
2. Dependencies make sense
3. Instructions are clear enough for an agent
4. Variables resolve correctly

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph CodeReview["Code Review Formula"]
        LC[load-context] --> SR[security-review]
        LC --> PR[performance-review]
        LC --> STR[style-review]
        SR --> WR[write-review]
        PR --> WR
        STR --> WR
    end
```

:::note Test Formulas Manually Before Deploying to Polecats
Use `gt mol pour <formula> --hook` to pour a molecule onto your own hook and step through it manually with `gt mol step next` and `gt mol step done`. This lets you verify step ordering, dependency logic, and variable resolution before any polecat runs it. Catching a broken formula early saves significant time and tokens.
:::

:::warning Keep Step Descriptions Agent-Readable, Not Human-Readable
Formula step descriptions are executed by AI agents, not read by humans. Avoid vague instructions like "review the code for issues" and instead provide explicit commands to run, specific files to check, and concrete success criteria. An agent cannot infer intent from context the way a human colleague can -- precision in step descriptions directly translates to fewer failed molecules and lower token costs.
:::

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Poured: gt mol pour
    Poured --> Running: Agent picks up
    Running --> StepDone: Step completes
    StepDone --> Running: Next step
    StepDone --> Gated: Gate step reached
    Gated --> Running: Gate closes
    Running --> Crashed: Agent crashes
    Crashed --> Running: New agent resumes
    StepDone --> Complete: All steps done
    Complete --> [*]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph FormulaTypes["Formula Pattern Types"]
        SEQ[Sequential Steps<br/>Build Pipeline] --> USES1[Strict Order]
        PAR[Parallel Branches<br/>Code Review] --> USES2[Independent Legs]
        GATED[Gated Workflow<br/>Deploy Process] --> USES3[External Wait]
        HYBRID[Hybrid<br/>Feature Deploy] --> USES4[Mixed Pattern]
    end
```

## Best Practices

**Keep steps focused.** Each step should be one clear action. If a step description is more than a paragraph, consider splitting it into multiple steps.

**Use descriptive IDs.** Step IDs appear in logs and status output. `security-review` is better than `step-3`.

**Add needs conservatively.** Only declare dependencies that are actually required. Unnecessary dependencies serialize work that could run in parallel (across multiple formulas).

**Version your formulas.** The `version` field helps track which formula version produced a given molecule. Bump it when you make changes.

**Write for agents, not humans.** Formula step descriptions are read by AI agents. Be explicit about what commands to run, what files to check, and what the success criteria are. Don't assume background knowledge.

## Next Steps

- **[Molecules & Formulas](/docs/concepts/molecules)** — Full reference for the molecule system
- **[Gates](/docs/concepts/gates)** — Async coordination for pausing workflows
- **[GUPP & NDI](/docs/concepts/gupp)** — Why molecule progress survives crashes
- **[Wisps](/docs/concepts/wisps)** — The individual step instances that track formula progress
- **[Polecat Lifecycle](/docs/agents/polecats)** — How polecats execute molecules
- **[Formula Design Patterns](/blog/formula-design-patterns)** — Advanced patterns for composing multi-step workflows
- **[Molecules and Formulas](/blog/molecules-and-formulas)** — How the molecule engine powers formula execution
- **[Code Review with Polecats](/blog/code-review-workflow)** — See formulas in action with parallel code review
- **[Hook-Driven Architecture](/blog/hook-driven-architecture)** — How hooks trigger formula execution when work lands on an agent
- **[The Security Model](/blog/security-model)** — Security considerations when formulas execute external commands and API calls
- **[Rigs Overview](/docs/concepts/rigs)** — Understanding rigs helps scope formulas to the right execution context
- **[Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns)** — How formulas integrate with broader work distribution strategies

Commit message:

Raise test 43 threshold: blog Mermaid diagrams from 7 to 8

blog/2026-02-13-custom-formulas.md, after:

---
title: "Building Your First Custom Formula"
description: "Step-by-step guide to creating TOML formulas that define custom agent workflows for specialized tasks in Gas Town."
slug: custom-formulas
authors: [gastown]
tags: [tutorial, formulas, molecules, customization]
---

Gas Town ships with built-in formulas for common workflows, but the real power comes from writing your own. Custom formulas let you define exactly how agents handle your specific tasks — from code review pipelines to database migration workflows.

<!-- truncate -->

## What's a Formula?

A formula is a TOML file that defines a sequence of steps for an agent to follow. When work gets assigned, Gas Town "pours" the formula into a molecule — a live workflow instance that tracks progress through each step.

```text
Formula (TOML template)  →  pour  →  Molecule (running workflow)
```

The key benefit: if an agent crashes mid-workflow, the molecule remembers which steps completed. The next agent picks up exactly where the last one left off. This persistence is powered by [GUPP](/blog/understanding-gupp), Gas Town's propulsion principle.

:::tip Crash Recovery Is Built In
Because each step's completion is recorded in the molecule, you never lose progress when an agent crashes. The next agent that picks up the work skips all completed steps and resumes from the exact point of failure. Design your steps as discrete, independently completable units to maximize this benefit.
:::

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    F[Formula TOML] -->|pour| M[Molecule]
    M --> W1[Wisp: Step 1]
    M --> W2[Wisp: Step 2]
    M --> W3[Wisp: Step N]
    W1 -->|done| W2
    W2 -->|done| W3
```

## Anatomy of a Formula

Every formula lives in `.beads/formulas/` and follows this structure:

```toml
[formula]
id = "my-custom-workflow"
name = "My Custom Workflow"
description = "What this workflow does"
version = "1.0.0"

[[steps]]
id = "step-1"
title = "First step"
description = """
Detailed instructions for the agent.
This is what the agent reads to know what to do.
"""

[[steps]]
id = "step-2"
title = "Second step"
needs = ["step-1"]
description = """
This step runs after step-1 completes.
"""
```

The following chart breaks down the typical components of a production formula by complexity.

```mermaid
pie title Formula Component Breakdown
    "Step Descriptions" : 50
    "Dependencies (needs)" : 20
    "Variables" : 15
    "Gates" : 10
    "Metadata" : 5
```

The following table summarizes all the configuration fields available in a formula TOML file:

| Field | Section | Required | Purpose |
|-------|---------|----------|---------|
| `id` | `[formula]` | Yes | Unique identifier used to reference the formula when pouring molecules (e.g., `code-review`) |
| `name` | `[formula]` | Yes | Human-readable display name shown in listings and status output |
| `description` | `[formula]` | No | Explains what the formula does; helps users choose the right formula |
| `version` | `[formula]` | No | Tracks which formula revision produced a given molecule; bump on changes |
| `id` | `[[steps]]` | Yes | Unique step identifier that appears in logs, status, and dependency declarations |
| `title` | `[[steps]]` | Yes | Short summary of what the step does, displayed in `gt mol status` |
| `description` | `[[steps]]` | Yes | Detailed instructions the agent reads to execute the step; supports markdown and code blocks |
| `needs` | `[[steps]]` | No | Array of step IDs that must complete before this step starts (e.g., `["step-1"]`) |
| `gate` | `[[steps]]` | No | Set to `true` to pause the workflow at this step until an external condition is met |
| `gate_type` | `[[steps]]` | No | Specifies the type of external gate (e.g., `gh:run` for GitHub Actions); used with `gate = true` |

The `needs` field creates dependencies — step-2 won't start until step-1 is done.

## Example: Code Review Formula

Let's build a formula that guides an agent through a structured code review:

```toml
[formula]
id = "code-review"
name = "Structured Code Review"
description = "Systematic code review with security, performance, and style checks"
version = "1.0.0"

[[steps]]
id = "load-context"
title = "Load PR context"
description = """
Read the PR description and all changed files.
Understand the intent of the changes before reviewing.

```bash
gh pr view {{pr_number}} --json title,body,files
gh pr diff {{pr_number}}
```

Note the files changed, the PR title, and any linked issues.
"""

[[steps]]
id = "security-review"
title = "Security review"
needs = ["load-context"]
description = """
Check all changed files for security issues:
- SQL injection risks (unsanitized input in queries)
- XSS vulnerabilities (unescaped output in templates)
- Authentication/authorization bypasses
- Secrets or credentials in code
- Unsafe deserialization

If you find issues, add them to your review notes with severity.
"""

[[steps]]
id = "performance-review"
title = "Performance review"
needs = ["load-context"]
description = """
Check for performance issues:
- N+1 query patterns
- Missing database indexes for new queries
- Unbounded loops or recursion
- Large allocations in hot paths
- Missing pagination on list endpoints

Note: this step runs in parallel with security-review since both
only depend on load-context.
"""

[[steps]]
id = "style-review"
title = "Style and consistency review"
needs = ["load-context"]
description = """
Check code style and consistency:
- Follows existing patterns in the codebase
- Consistent naming conventions
- Appropriate test coverage for new code
- Documentation for public APIs
- No dead code or commented-out blocks
"""

[[steps]]
id = "write-review"
title = "Write and submit review"
needs = ["security-review", "performance-review", "style-review"]
description = """
Compile findings from all review steps into a single PR review.
Categorize findings as:
- 🔴 Must fix (security issues, bugs)
- 🟡 Should fix (performance, maintainability)
- 🟢 Suggestion (style, optional improvements)

Submit the review via:
```bash
gh pr review {{pr_number}} --body "review content"
```
"""
```

Notice how `security-review`, `performance-review`, and `style-review` all depend only on `load-context`. In theory, they could run in parallel (though a single agent executes them sequentially).

```mermaid
graph TD
    WRITE[Write TOML Formula] --> REG[Register in .beads/formulas/]
    REG --> TEST[Test with gt mol pour --hook]
    TEST --> STEP[Step through manually]
    STEP --> OK{Steps correct?}
    OK -->|No| WRITE
    OK -->|Yes| DEPLOY[Deploy to polecats]
    DEPLOY --> POUR[gt mol pour in production]
```

:::danger Never Modify a Formula While Molecules Are Running
If you edit a formula TOML file while active molecules are using it, the running molecules will not pick up the changes -- but newly poured molecules will use the updated version. This creates inconsistency. Always wait for all in-flight molecules to complete or squash them before updating a formula, and bump the version field to track the change.
:::

## Variables with Double Braces

Formulas support `{{variable}}` placeholders that get filled when the molecule is poured:

```toml
[[steps]]
id = "checkout"
title = "Check out the target branch"
description = """
```bash
git checkout {{branch_name}}
git pull origin {{branch_name}}
```
"""
```

When you pour this formula, you provide the variable values:

```bash
gt mol pour code-review --var pr_number=42 --var branch_name=feature/auth
```

:::warning Variables Do Not Support Default Values
If a formula step references `{{variable_name}}` but you forget to provide `--var variable_name=value` when pouring the molecule, the step will fail when an agent encounters the unresolved placeholder. Gas Town does not support default values or optional variables. Always check the formula with `bd formula show <id>` to see which variables are required before pouring.
:::

:::caution Variables Are Not Validated Until Step Execution
The `gt mol pour` command accepts any variables you provide without checking if the formula actually uses them. Typos in variable names (like `--var prnumber=42` instead of `--var pr_number=42`) will only be caught when the agent reaches a step that references the undefined variable, wasting a session. Double-check variable names against the formula TOML before pouring.
:::


```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant U as User
    participant F as Formula TOML
    participant M as Molecule
    participant A as Agent

    U->>F: gt mol pour --var x=val
    F->>M: Pour with variables
    M->>M: Replace {{x}} with val
    M->>A: Assign to agent
    A->>M: Read step with resolved vars
    A->>A: Execute commands
    A->>M: Mark step done
```

:::info Missing Variables Cause Immediate Molecule Failure
If a formula references `{{variable_name}}` but you don't provide that variable when pouring the molecule with `--var variable_name=value`, the molecule will fail immediately when the agent encounters the unresolved placeholder. Always check the formula's variable requirements with `bd formula show <id>` before pouring to avoid wasted sessions.
:::

## Step Types: Gates and Pauses

Some workflows need to wait for external events. Use gates for this:

```toml
[[steps]]
id = "wait-for-ci"
title = "Wait for CI to pass"
gate = true
gate_type = "gh:run"
description = """
Create a gate and park. The Deacon will close this gate
when the GitHub Actions run completes.

```bash
bd gate create --type gh:run --run-id <run-id> --title "Wait for CI"
gt mol step park --gate <gate-id>
```
"""
```

When a step has `gate = true`, the agent parks the molecule at that step. The Deacon's patrol cycle checks whether the gate condition is met and resumes the workflow automatically. For a complete understanding of how gates enable asynchronous coordination, refer to the [gates documentation](/docs/concepts/gates).

## Registering Your Formula

Once you've written your formula, register it:

```bash
# Copy to the formulas directory
cp my-workflow.formula.toml .beads/formulas/

# List available formulas
bd formula list

# Pour it into a molecule for testing
gt mol pour my-custom-workflow --var key=value
```

For complex multi-rig deployments, you can combine formulas with [advanced convoy patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns) to orchestrate work across multiple repositories simultaneously. The [formula workflow guide](/docs/workflows/formula-workflow) provides operational best practices for running formulas in production.

## Testing Your Formula

Before deploying a formula to production polecats, test it manually:

```bash
# Pour and hook to yourself
gt mol pour code-review --var pr_number=1 --hook

# Check the molecule status
gt mol status

# Step through manually
gt mol step next    # Move to next step
gt mol step show    # See current step details
gt mol step done    # Mark current step complete
```

This lets you verify that:
1. Steps are in the right order
2. Dependencies make sense
3. Instructions are clear enough for an agent
4. Variables resolve correctly

### Formula Variable Substitution Process

This diagram shows how variables flow from the pour command through the formula to the executing agent.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant C as gt mol pour
    participant F as Formula Template
    participant M as Molecule Instance
    participant A as Agent Session

    C->>F: --var key=value
    F->>M: Replace {{key}} with value
    M->>A: Assign molecule
    A->>M: Read resolved step text
    A->>A: Execute with actual values
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph CodeReview["Code Review Formula"]
        LC[load-context] --> SR[security-review]
        LC --> PR[performance-review]
        LC --> STR[style-review]
        SR --> WR[write-review]
        PR --> WR
        STR --> WR
    end
```

:::note Test Formulas Manually Before Deploying to Polecats
Use `gt mol pour <formula> --hook` to pour a molecule onto your own hook and step through it manually with `gt mol step next` and `gt mol step done`. This lets you verify step ordering, dependency logic, and variable resolution before any polecat runs it. Catching a broken formula early saves significant time and tokens.
:::

:::warning Keep Step Descriptions Agent-Readable, Not Human-Readable
Formula step descriptions are executed by AI agents, not read by humans. Avoid vague instructions like "review the code for issues" and instead provide explicit commands to run, specific files to check, and concrete success criteria. An agent cannot infer intent from context the way a human colleague can -- precision in step descriptions directly translates to fewer failed molecules and lower token costs.
:::

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Poured: gt mol pour
    Poured --> Running: Agent picks up
    Running --> StepDone: Step completes
    StepDone --> Running: Next step
    StepDone --> Gated: Gate step reached
    Gated --> Running: Gate closes
    Running --> Crashed: Agent crashes
    Crashed --> Running: New agent resumes
    StepDone --> Complete: All steps done
    Complete --> [*]
```

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph FormulaTypes["Formula Pattern Types"]
        SEQ[Sequential Steps<br/>Build Pipeline] --> USES1[Strict Order]
        PAR[Parallel Branches<br/>Code Review] --> USES2[Independent Legs]
        GATED[Gated Workflow<br/>Deploy Process] --> USES3[External Wait]
        HYBRID[Hybrid<br/>Feature Deploy] --> USES4[Mixed Pattern]
    end
```

## Best Practices

**Keep steps focused.** Each step should be one clear action. If a step description is more than a paragraph, consider splitting it into multiple steps.

**Use descriptive IDs.** Step IDs appear in logs and status output. `security-review` is better than `step-3`.

**Add needs conservatively.** Only declare dependencies that are actually required. Unnecessary dependencies serialize work that could run in parallel (across multiple formulas).

**Version your formulas.** The `version` field helps track which formula version produced a given molecule. Bump it when you make changes.

**Write for agents, not humans.** Formula step descriptions are read by AI agents. Be explicit about what commands to run, what files to check, and what the success criteria are. Don't assume background knowledge.

## Next Steps

- **[Molecules & Formulas](/docs/concepts/molecules)** — Full reference for the molecule system
- **[Gates](/docs/concepts/gates)** — Async coordination for pausing workflows
- **[GUPP & NDI](/docs/concepts/gupp)** — Why molecule progress survives crashes
- **[Wisps](/docs/concepts/wisps)** — The individual step instances that track formula progress
- **[Polecat Lifecycle](/docs/agents/polecats)** — How polecats execute molecules
- **[Formula Design Patterns](/blog/formula-design-patterns)** — Advanced patterns for composing multi-step workflows
- **[Molecules and Formulas](/blog/molecules-and-formulas)** — How the molecule engine powers formula execution
- **[Code Review with Polecats](/blog/code-review-workflow)** — See formulas in action with parallel code review
- **[Hook-Driven Architecture](/blog/hook-driven-architecture)** — How hooks trigger formula execution when work lands on an agent
- **[The Security Model](/blog/security-model)** — Security considerations when formulas execute external commands and API calls
- **[Rigs Overview](/docs/concepts/rigs)** — Understanding rigs helps scope formulas to the right execution context
- **[Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns)** — How formulas integrate with broader work distribution strategies
