blog/2026-02-13-your-second-convoy.md, before:

---
title: "Your Second Convoy: Beyond Hello World"
description: "After your first convoy, learn to handle dependencies, cross-rig work, stuck polecats, and real-world convoy patterns."
slug: your-second-convoy
authors: [gastown]
tags: [tutorial, getting-started, workflow, operations]
---

Your [first convoy](/blog/first-convoy) was three independent beads slung to one rig. Everything worked because nothing depended on anything else. Real work is messier. Your second convoy will teach you dependencies, cross-rig coordination, monitoring, and what to do when things go wrong. When problems arise, the [escalation system](/blog/escalation-system) ensures issues get routed appropriately.

<!-- truncate -->

## What Changes After "Hello World"

The first convoy tutorial teaches the mechanics: create beads, bundle, sling, monitor. But it sidesteps the hard parts, which become important when [scaling beyond 30](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) concurrent agents:

- What if task B depends on task A finishing first?
- What if work spans multiple rigs?
- What if a polecat gets stuck?
- How do you handle a convoy that's half-done and half-broken?

These are the patterns that separate a Gas Town beginner from a productive operator. For even more sophisticated coordination strategies, see [advanced convoy patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns).

## Pattern 1: Dependencies Between Beads

Real work has ordering constraints. You can't write tests before the feature exists. You can't update docs before the API is finalized. Understanding how [convoys](/docs/concepts/convoys) track multi-bead workflows is essential for managing these dependencies.

```bash
# Create beads with an implicit dependency
bd create --title "Implement rate limiting middleware" --type task --priority 1
# → ga-aaa

bd create --title "Add rate limit tests" --type task --priority 2
# → ga-bbb

bd create --title "Document rate limit headers" --type task --priority 2
# → ga-ccc

# Set dependencies: tests and docs block on implementation
bd dep add ga-bbb ga-aaa   # ga-bbb needs ga-aaa
bd dep add ga-ccc ga-aaa   # ga-ccc needs ga-aaa
```

Now bundle and sling:

```bash
gt convoy create "Rate Limiting" ga-aaa ga-bbb ga-ccc
gt sling ga-aaa myproject
```

Only sling `ga-aaa` initially. The other beads are blocked. When the implementation polecat finishes and `ga-aaa` closes, the dependencies clear:

```bash
# After ga-aaa completes, check what's unblocked
bd ready
# → ga-bbb: Add rate limit tests (no blockers)
# → ga-ccc: Document rate limit headers (no blockers)

# Now sling the unblocked work
gt sling ga-bbb myproject
gt sling ga-ccc myproject
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    A["ga-aaa<br/>Implement rate limiting"] --> B["ga-bbb<br/>Add tests"]
    A --> C["ga-ccc<br/>Update docs"]

    style A fill:#4CAF50,color:white
    style B fill:#FFC107,color:black
    style C fill:#FFC107,color:black
```

The [Witness](/docs/agents/witness) can also auto-sling unblocked beads if configured to do so. For more on how the Witness monitors agent health and triggers recovery, see [witness explained](/blog/witness-explained).

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant BD as Beads
    participant CV as Convoy
    participant PC as Polecat
    H->>BD: bd create (3 beads)
    H->>BD: bd dep add (set ordering)
    H->>CV: gt convoy create
    H->>PC: gt sling ga-aaa
    PC->>BD: bd close ga-aaa
    Note over BD: Dependencies clear
    H->>PC: gt sling ga-bbb, ga-ccc
    PC->>BD: bd close ga-bbb, ga-ccc
    BD->>CV: Convoy auto-closes
```

## Pattern 2: Cross-Rig Work

Some convoys span multiple projects. A frontend change might depend on a backend API update:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant B as Backend Rig
    participant F as Frontend Rig
    participant C as Convoy Tracker
    H->>B: gt sling ga-ddd (API endpoint)
    B->>B: Polecat implements API
    B->>C: bd close ga-ddd
    Note over C: Dependency clears
    H->>F: gt sling ga-eee (UI component)
    F->>F: Polecat builds UI
    F->>C: bd close ga-eee
    C-->>H: Convoy auto-closes
```

The following diagram shows how cross-rig dependencies flow through a multi-repo convoy.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Backend["Backend Rig"]
        API[ga-ddd: Add /api/notifications]
    end
    subgraph Frontend["Frontend Rig"]
        UI[ga-eee: Notification bell component]
    end
    subgraph Convoy["Convoy: Notifications"]
        CV[hq-cv-042]
    end
    API -->|dependency| UI
    API -.->|tracked by| CV
    UI -.->|tracked by| CV
    CV -->|auto-close when both done| DONE[Complete]
```


```bash
# Create beads for different rigs
bd create --title "Add /api/notifications endpoint" --type task
# → ga-ddd (for the backend rig)

bd create --title "Build notification bell component" --type task
# → ga-eee (for the frontend rig)

# Set cross-rig dependency
bd dep add ga-eee ga-ddd   # frontend needs backend API

# Bundle and sling to different rigs
gt convoy create "Notifications" ga-ddd ga-eee
gt sling ga-ddd backend
# Wait for backend to finish, then:
gt sling ga-eee frontend
```

Cross-rig convoys work exactly like single-rig convoys — the dependency system doesn't care which rig a bead is assigned to. The convoy tracks completion across all rigs. Each rig has its own [Refinery](/docs/agents/refinery) that processes merges independently, so cross-rig work naturally parallelizes at the merge stage.

## Pattern 3: Monitoring a Running Convoy

With 5+ polecats working, you need to know what's happening:

```bash
# Overview of all convoys
gt convoy list

# Detailed view of one convoy
gt convoy show hq-cv-042

# Live activity feed across all rigs
gt feed

# Check individual polecat status
gt polecat list --rig myproject
```

Key signals to watch for:

| Signal | Meaning | Action |
|---|---|---|
| Polecat status: `working` | Normal operation | None |
| Polecat status: `idle` | Finished or stuck | Check if bead is closed |
| Convoy progress: `3/5` | Three beads done | Check remaining two |
| Stranded beads | Unassigned work | `gt sling` the stranded beads |

```bash
# Find beads that fell through the cracks
gt convoy stranded
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Recovery["Stuck Polecat Recovery"]
        ND[gt nudge] -->|responds| OK[Resume Work]
        ND -->|no response| AT[gt polecat attach]
        AT -->|fixable| FX[Fix + Continue]
        AT -->|hopeless| KL[gt polecat kill + re-sling]
    end
```

## Pattern 4: Handling Stuck Polecats

Polecats get stuck. Tests fail. Dependencies are missing. Context windows fill up. Here's the recovery playbook:

### Nudge First

Sometimes a polecat just needs a push:

```bash
gt nudge myproject/polecats/toast "Status update? Are you blocked?"
```

### Check Its Work

Attach to the polecat's session to see what it's doing:

```bash
gt polecat attach toast --rig myproject
```

### Re-Sling the Work

If the polecat is truly stuck, release the bead and re-sling:

```bash
gt release ga-aaa               # Release bead from stuck polecat
gt sling ga-aaa myproject       # Fresh polecat picks it up
```

### Nuclear Option

If the polecat is a zombie consuming resources:

```bash
gt polecat nuke myproject/toast  # Terminate and clean up
```

The bead returns to `pending` status. Sling it again to a fresh polecat.

:::note The Witness Can Auto-Sling Unblocked Beads for You
If you configure auto-slinging on your rig, the Witness will detect when a dependency clears and automatically sling the unblocked bead to an available polecat. This eliminates the need to manually watch for completed dependencies and run `gt sling` yourself. Enable it with `gt rig config <rig> witness.auto_sling true` — but note that it removes your ability to review each assignment before dispatch.
:::

## Pattern 5: Growing a Convoy Mid-Flight

Requirements change. You discover additional work halfway through a convoy:

```bash
# Add a new bead to an existing convoy
bd create --title "Fix edge case in rate limiter" --type bug --priority 1
# → ga-fff

gt convoy add hq-cv-042 ga-fff
gt sling ga-fff myproject
```

The convoy's completion criteria automatically expands. It won't auto-close until all beads (including the new one) are done.

:::info Adding Beads Mid-Convoy Resets the Auto-Close Timer
When you add a new bead to an existing convoy with `gt convoy add`, the convoy's auto-close logic recalculates based on the expanded scope. If the convoy was about to auto-close because its original beads were all done, adding a new bead pushes that auto-close event back until the new bead also completes. This prevents premature convoy closure when scope expands during execution.
:::

:::tip Decompose Aggressively — Five Small Beads Beat Two Large Ones
Small, focused beads finish faster, parallelize better, conflict less during merging, and are far easier to re-sling when a polecat gets stuck. If a bead description takes more than a short paragraph, it is probably too big. Split it before slinging.
:::

:::warning Do Not Sling Dependent Beads Before Their Blockers Complete
Slinging a bead that still has unresolved dependencies will assign it to a polecat that cannot make progress — the agent will stall waiting for prerequisite code that has not landed on main yet. Always check `bd ready` before slinging to confirm a bead's dependencies have cleared. If you sling prematurely, the Witness will eventually detect the stall, but you will have wasted a polecat session and its token budget.
:::

:::info Use `gt convoy show` to Spot Stranded Beads Early
A stranded bead is one that belongs to a convoy but has not been slung to any agent — it sits in the ready queue with no polecat assigned. This commonly happens when a dependency clears and you forget to sling the unblocked work. Running `gt convoy show <id>` after each bead completes helps you catch stranded beads immediately, so your convoy does not stall waiting for work that nobody has picked up.
:::

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Created: bd create
    Created --> Bundled: gt convoy create
    Bundled --> Slung: gt sling
    Slung --> Working: Polecat picks up
    Working --> Done: gt done
    Working --> Stuck: No progress
    Stuck --> Released: gt release
    Released --> Slung: gt sling (re-sling)
    Done --> [*]: Convoy tracks completion
```

```mermaid
mindmap
  root((Second Convoy Lessons))
    Dependencies
      bd dep add
      bd ready to check
      Unblock order matters
    Cross-Rig
      Different repos
      Coordinate via convoy
      Same tracking system
    Monitoring
      gt convoy show
      gt feed for activity
      gt polecat list
    Recovery
      gt nudge first
      gt polecat attach to debug
      gt release and re-sling
      gt polecat nuke last resort
    Scaling
      Decompose small
      Monitor actively
      Use Mayor for 5+ beads
```

**Set dependencies explicitly.** Don't rely on polecats to figure out ordering. Use `bd dep add` to make the dependency graph explicit.

**Monitor actively.** Check `gt convoy show` every few minutes during active convoys. Catch stuck polecats early before they waste context.

**Don't over-sling.** Slinging 10 beads simultaneously to one rig creates resource contention. Start with 3-5 parallel polecats and scale up as needed.

**Use the Mayor for complex convoys.** If you're managing more than 5 beads with cross-rig dependencies, consider the [Mayor workflow](/docs/workflows/mayor-workflow) instead. Let the Mayor handle decomposition and routing.

:::caution Re-Slinging a Bead Does Not Preserve Partial Progress Unless You Commit First
When you run `gt release` to pull a bead from a stuck polecat and then `gt sling` it to a fresh agent, any uncommitted code changes from the first polecat are lost. The molecule state (completed steps) survives, but work-in-progress in the old worktree is abandoned. If the stuck polecat made meaningful progress, attach to its session with `gt polecat attach`, manually commit its changes, and then re-sling. Otherwise, the fresh agent starts the current step from scratch.
:::

## Next Steps

- [Manual Convoy Workflow](/docs/workflows/manual-convoy) — Full reference for convoy creation and management
- [Work Distribution Architecture](/docs/architecture/work-distribution) — How work flows through the dependency system
- [Troubleshooting](/docs/operations/troubleshooting) — Common polecat issues and recovery procedures
- [Your First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy) — Review the basics if needed
- [Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns) — When to use manual convoys vs. Mayor vs. formulas
- [Monitoring Your Fleet](/blog/monitoring-fleet) — Practical monitoring techniques for running convoys
- [First Convoy Guide](/docs/getting-started/first-convoy) — Step-by-step tutorial for your very first convoy

Commit message:

Raise test 51 threshold: blog admonitions from 6 to 7

blog/2026-02-13-your-second-convoy.md, after:

---
title: "Your Second Convoy: Beyond Hello World"
description: "After your first convoy, learn to handle dependencies, cross-rig work, stuck polecats, and real-world convoy patterns."
slug: your-second-convoy
authors: [gastown]
tags: [tutorial, getting-started, workflow, operations]
---

Your [first convoy](/blog/first-convoy) was three independent beads slung to one rig. Everything worked because nothing depended on anything else. Real work is messier. Your second convoy will teach you dependencies, cross-rig coordination, monitoring, and what to do when things go wrong. When problems arise, the [escalation system](/blog/escalation-system) ensures issues get routed appropriately.

<!-- truncate -->

## What Changes After "Hello World"

The first convoy tutorial teaches the mechanics: create beads, bundle, sling, monitor. But it sidesteps the hard parts, which become important when [scaling beyond 30](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) concurrent agents:

- What if task B depends on task A finishing first?
- What if work spans multiple rigs?
- What if a polecat gets stuck?
- How do you handle a convoy that's half-done and half-broken?

These are the patterns that separate a Gas Town beginner from a productive operator. For even more sophisticated coordination strategies, see [advanced convoy patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns).

## Pattern 1: Dependencies Between Beads

Real work has ordering constraints. You can't write tests before the feature exists. You can't update docs before the API is finalized. Understanding how [convoys](/docs/concepts/convoys) track multi-bead workflows is essential for managing these dependencies.

```bash
# Create beads with an implicit dependency
bd create --title "Implement rate limiting middleware" --type task --priority 1
# → ga-aaa

bd create --title "Add rate limit tests" --type task --priority 2
# → ga-bbb

bd create --title "Document rate limit headers" --type task --priority 2
# → ga-ccc

# Set dependencies: tests and docs block on implementation
bd dep add ga-bbb ga-aaa   # ga-bbb needs ga-aaa
bd dep add ga-ccc ga-aaa   # ga-ccc needs ga-aaa
```

Now bundle and sling:

```bash
gt convoy create "Rate Limiting" ga-aaa ga-bbb ga-ccc
gt sling ga-aaa myproject
```

Only sling `ga-aaa` initially. The other beads are blocked. When the implementation polecat finishes and `ga-aaa` closes, the dependencies clear:

```bash
# After ga-aaa completes, check what's unblocked
bd ready
# → ga-bbb: Add rate limit tests (no blockers)
# → ga-ccc: Document rate limit headers (no blockers)

# Now sling the unblocked work
gt sling ga-bbb myproject
gt sling ga-ccc myproject
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    A["ga-aaa<br/>Implement rate limiting"] --> B["ga-bbb<br/>Add tests"]
    A --> C["ga-ccc<br/>Update docs"]

    style A fill:#4CAF50,color:white
    style B fill:#FFC107,color:black
    style C fill:#FFC107,color:black
```

The [Witness](/docs/agents/witness) can also auto-sling unblocked beads if configured to do so. For more on how the Witness monitors agent health and triggers recovery, see [witness explained](/blog/witness-explained).

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant BD as Beads
    participant CV as Convoy
    participant PC as Polecat
    H->>BD: bd create (3 beads)
    H->>BD: bd dep add (set ordering)
    H->>CV: gt convoy create
    H->>PC: gt sling ga-aaa
    PC->>BD: bd close ga-aaa
    Note over BD: Dependencies clear
    H->>PC: gt sling ga-bbb, ga-ccc
    PC->>BD: bd close ga-bbb, ga-ccc
    BD->>CV: Convoy auto-closes
```

## Pattern 2: Cross-Rig Work

Some convoys span multiple projects. A frontend change might depend on a backend API update:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant B as Backend Rig
    participant F as Frontend Rig
    participant C as Convoy Tracker
    H->>B: gt sling ga-ddd (API endpoint)
    B->>B: Polecat implements API
    B->>C: bd close ga-ddd
    Note over C: Dependency clears
    H->>F: gt sling ga-eee (UI component)
    F->>F: Polecat builds UI
    F->>C: bd close ga-eee
    C-->>H: Convoy auto-closes
```

The following diagram shows how cross-rig dependencies flow through a multi-repo convoy.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Backend["Backend Rig"]
        API[ga-ddd: Add /api/notifications]
    end
    subgraph Frontend["Frontend Rig"]
        UI[ga-eee: Notification bell component]
    end
    subgraph Convoy["Convoy: Notifications"]
        CV[hq-cv-042]
    end
    API -->|dependency| UI
    API -.->|tracked by| CV
    UI -.->|tracked by| CV
    CV -->|auto-close when both done| DONE[Complete]
```


```bash
# Create beads for different rigs
bd create --title "Add /api/notifications endpoint" --type task
# → ga-ddd (for the backend rig)

bd create --title "Build notification bell component" --type task
# → ga-eee (for the frontend rig)

# Set cross-rig dependency
bd dep add ga-eee ga-ddd   # frontend needs backend API

# Bundle and sling to different rigs
gt convoy create "Notifications" ga-ddd ga-eee
gt sling ga-ddd backend
# Wait for backend to finish, then:
gt sling ga-eee frontend
```

Cross-rig convoys work exactly like single-rig convoys — the dependency system doesn't care which rig a bead is assigned to. The convoy tracks completion across all rigs. Each rig has its own [Refinery](/docs/agents/refinery) that processes merges independently, so cross-rig work naturally parallelizes at the merge stage.

## Pattern 3: Monitoring a Running Convoy

With 5+ polecats working, you need to know what's happening:

```bash
# Overview of all convoys
gt convoy list

# Detailed view of one convoy
gt convoy show hq-cv-042

# Live activity feed across all rigs
gt feed

# Check individual polecat status
gt polecat list --rig myproject
```

Key signals to watch for:

| Signal | Meaning | Action |
|---|---|---|
| Polecat status: `working` | Normal operation | None |
| Polecat status: `idle` | Finished or stuck | Check if bead is closed |
| Convoy progress: `3/5` | Three beads done | Check remaining two |
| Stranded beads | Unassigned work | `gt sling` the stranded beads |

```bash
# Find beads that fell through the cracks
gt convoy stranded
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Recovery["Stuck Polecat Recovery"]
        ND[gt nudge] -->|responds| OK[Resume Work]
        ND -->|no response| AT[gt polecat attach]
        AT -->|fixable| FX[Fix + Continue]
        AT -->|hopeless| KL[gt polecat kill + re-sling]
    end
```

## Pattern 4: Handling Stuck Polecats

Polecats get stuck. Tests fail. Dependencies are missing. Context windows fill up. Here's the recovery playbook:

### Nudge First

Sometimes a polecat just needs a push:

```bash
gt nudge myproject/polecats/toast "Status update? Are you blocked?"
```

### Check Its Work

Attach to the polecat's session to see what it's doing:

```bash
gt polecat attach toast --rig myproject
```

### Re-Sling the Work

If the polecat is truly stuck, release the bead and re-sling:

```bash
gt release ga-aaa               # Release bead from stuck polecat
gt sling ga-aaa myproject       # Fresh polecat picks it up
```

### Nuclear Option

If the polecat is a zombie consuming resources:

```bash
gt polecat nuke myproject/toast  # Terminate and clean up
```

The bead returns to `pending` status. Sling it again to a fresh polecat.

:::note The Witness Can Auto-Sling Unblocked Beads for You
If you configure auto-slinging on your rig, the Witness will detect when a dependency clears and automatically sling the unblocked bead to an available polecat. This eliminates the need to manually watch for completed dependencies and run `gt sling` yourself. Enable it with `gt rig config <rig> witness.auto_sling true` — but note that it removes your ability to review each assignment before dispatch.
:::

## Pattern 5: Growing a Convoy Mid-Flight

Requirements change. You discover additional work halfway through a convoy:

```bash
# Add a new bead to an existing convoy
bd create --title "Fix edge case in rate limiter" --type bug --priority 1
# → ga-fff

gt convoy add hq-cv-042 ga-fff
gt sling ga-fff myproject
```

The convoy's completion criteria automatically expands. It won't auto-close until all beads (including the new one) are done.

:::info Adding Beads Mid-Convoy Resets the Auto-Close Timer
When you add a new bead to an existing convoy with `gt convoy add`, the convoy's auto-close logic recalculates based on the expanded scope. If the convoy was about to auto-close because its original beads were all done, adding a new bead pushes that auto-close event back until the new bead also completes. This prevents premature convoy closure when scope expands during execution.
:::

:::tip Decompose Aggressively — Five Small Beads Beat Two Large Ones
Small, focused beads finish faster, parallelize better, conflict less during merging, and are far easier to re-sling when a polecat gets stuck. If a bead description takes more than a short paragraph, it is probably too big. Split it before slinging.
:::

:::warning Do Not Sling Dependent Beads Before Their Blockers Complete
Slinging a bead that still has unresolved dependencies will assign it to a polecat that cannot make progress — the agent will stall waiting for prerequisite code that has not landed on main yet. Always check `bd ready` before slinging to confirm a bead's dependencies have cleared. If you sling prematurely, the Witness will eventually detect the stall, but you will have wasted a polecat session and its token budget.
:::

:::info Use `gt convoy show` to Spot Stranded Beads Early
A stranded bead is one that belongs to a convoy but has not been slung to any agent — it sits in the ready queue with no polecat assigned. This commonly happens when a dependency clears and you forget to sling the unblocked work. Running `gt convoy show <id>` after each bead completes helps you catch stranded beads immediately, so your convoy does not stall waiting for work that nobody has picked up.
:::

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Created: bd create
    Created --> Bundled: gt convoy create
    Bundled --> Slung: gt sling
    Slung --> Working: Polecat picks up
    Working --> Done: gt done
    Working --> Stuck: No progress
    Stuck --> Released: gt release
    Released --> Slung: gt sling (re-sling)
    Done --> [*]: Convoy tracks completion
```

```mermaid
mindmap
  root((Second Convoy Lessons))
    Dependencies
      bd dep add
      bd ready to check
      Unblock order matters
    Cross-Rig
      Different repos
      Coordinate via convoy
      Same tracking system
    Monitoring
      gt convoy show
      gt feed for activity
      gt polecat list
    Recovery
      gt nudge first
      gt polecat attach to debug
      gt release and re-sling
      gt polecat nuke last resort
    Scaling
      Decompose small
      Monitor actively
      Use Mayor for 5+ beads
```

**Set dependencies explicitly.** Don't rely on polecats to figure out ordering. Use `bd dep add` to make the dependency graph explicit.

**Monitor actively.** Check `gt convoy show` every few minutes during active convoys. Catch stuck polecats early before they waste context.

**Don't over-sling.** Slinging 10 beads simultaneously to one rig creates resource contention. Start with 3-5 parallel polecats and scale up as needed.

**Use the Mayor for complex convoys.** If you're managing more than 5 beads with cross-rig dependencies, consider the [Mayor workflow](/docs/workflows/mayor-workflow) instead. Let the Mayor handle decomposition and routing.

:::danger Never Delete a Bead from a Running Convoy Without Removing It First
If you delete a bead with `bd delete` while it is still part of an active convoy, the convoy's progress tracking breaks — it will wait indefinitely for a bead that no longer exists, preventing auto-closure. Always remove the bead from the convoy first with `gt convoy remove <convoy-id> <bead-id>` before deleting it. This updates the convoy's completion criteria to exclude the removed bead.
:::

:::caution Re-Slinging a Bead Does Not Preserve Partial Progress Unless You Commit First
When you run `gt release` to pull a bead from a stuck polecat and then `gt sling` it to a fresh agent, any uncommitted code changes from the first polecat are lost. The molecule state (completed steps) survives, but work-in-progress in the old worktree is abandoned. If the stuck polecat made meaningful progress, attach to its session with `gt polecat attach`, manually commit its changes, and then re-sling. Otherwise, the fresh agent starts the current step from scratch.
:::

## Next Steps

- [Manual Convoy Workflow](/docs/workflows/manual-convoy) — Full reference for convoy creation and management
- [Work Distribution Architecture](/docs/architecture/work-distribution) — How work flows through the dependency system
- [Troubleshooting](/docs/operations/troubleshooting) — Common polecat issues and recovery procedures
- [Your First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy) — Review the basics if needed
- [Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns) — When to use manual convoys vs. Mayor vs. formulas
- [Monitoring Your Fleet](/blog/monitoring-fleet) — Practical monitoring techniques for running convoys
- [First Convoy Guide](/docs/getting-started/first-convoy) — Step-by-step tutorial for your very first convoy
