blog/2026-02-13-work-distribution-patterns.md, before:

---
title: "Work Distribution Patterns: Manual Convoy vs. Mayor vs. Formula"
description: "When should you use manual convoys, the Mayor workflow, or formulas? A decision framework for choosing the right work distribution pattern in Gas Town."
slug: work-distribution-patterns
authors: [gastown]
tags: [workflow, architecture, operations, concepts]
---

Gas Town offers three distinct ways to distribute work across agents: manual convoys, the Mayor workflow (MEOW), and formula-driven molecules. Each pattern trades control for automation differently. Choosing the wrong one costs time. Choosing the right one feels like magic. For template-based workflows, see [custom formulas](/blog/custom-formulas).

<!-- truncate -->

## The Three Patterns

Before diving into when to use each, here's what they are:

**Manual Convoy** — You create beads, bundle them in a convoy, sling each one individually, and monitor progress. Maximum control, maximum effort.

**Mayor Workflow (MEOW)** — You describe what you want in natural language. The Mayor creates beads, creates a convoy, slings work, and monitors everything. Minimum effort, less control.

**Formula Workflow** — You apply a pre-built TOML template that defines the steps. The formula becomes a live molecule that guides execution. Repeatable, structured, consistent.

All three patterns use the same underlying [convoy system](/docs/concepts/convoys) to track related beads and detect completion.

```mermaid
graph TD
    W[Work Needed] --> Q{How much<br/>control?}
    Q -->|Full control| MC[Manual Convoy]
    Q -->|Hands-off| MW[Mayor Workflow]
    Q -->|Repeatable process| FW[Formula Workflow]
    MC --> S1[You create beads]
    MC --> S2[You sling individually]
    MC --> S3[You monitor]
    MW --> S4[Mayor creates beads]
    MW --> S5[Mayor slings automatically]
    MW --> S6[Mayor monitors]
    FW --> S7[Template defines steps]
    FW --> S8[Agent follows formula]
    FW --> S9[Progress tracked by molecule]
```

## When to Use Manual Convoys

Manual convoys are the right choice when:

```mermaid
graph TD
    START[Need to Distribute Work] --> Q1{Process<br/>repeatable?}
    Q1 -->|Yes| FORM[Use Formula]
    Q1 -->|No| Q2{Can describe<br/>in 1 paragraph?}
    Q2 -->|Yes| MAYOR[Use Mayor MEOW]
    Q2 -->|No| Q3{Need precise<br/>control?}
    Q3 -->|Yes| MANUAL[Manual Convoy]
    Q3 -->|No| DEFAULT[Default: Mayor MEOW]

    style FORM fill:#4CAF50,color:white
    style MAYOR fill:#2196F3,color:white
    style MANUAL fill:#FF9800,color:white
```

The following pie chart shows the typical time distribution across different work distribution patterns.

```mermaid
pie title Time Distribution by Work Pattern
    "Manual Convoy: Planning" : 40
    "Manual Convoy: Execution" : 30
    "Mayor: Execution" : 20
    "Formula: Execution" : 10
```


- **You know exactly what the tasks are** and how to decompose them
- **Dependencies matter** — you need precise control over which task blocks which
- **Cross-rig coordination** requires human judgment about which rig handles what
- **Security-sensitive work** where you want to review each assignment before it happens. For security considerations in multi-agent workflows, see [security model](/blog/security-model).
- **Learning Gas Town** — manual mode teaches you how the system works

### The Workflow

```bash
# 1. Create beads for each piece of work
bd create --title "Fix SQL injection in login" --type bug --priority 1
bd create --title "Add input validation" --type task --priority 2

# 2. Bundle them in a convoy
gt convoy create "Auth Hardening" gt-a1 gt-b2

# 3. Sling each to the right agent/rig
gt sling gt-a1 backend
gt sling gt-b2 backend

# 4. Monitor
gt convoy show hq-cv-001
```

**Overhead**: High. You're doing the Mayor's job manually.
**Control**: Complete. Every decision is yours.

## When to Use the Mayor Workflow

MEOW is the right choice when:

- **You have a fuzzy goal** and want the Mayor to decompose it into tasks
- **Multi-rig work** where the Mayor can route beads to appropriate rigs
- **Speed matters more than precision** — you want work started in minutes, not after careful planning
- **You trust the system** and don't need to review every assignment
- **Large batches** with 5+ tasks where manual management becomes tedious

### The Workflow

```bash
# 1. Attach to the Mayor
gt mayor attach

# 2. Describe what you want in natural language
> Fix the 5 failing tests in auth, add rate limiting to the login endpoint,
> and update the API docs with the new rate limit headers.

# 3. Mayor creates beads, convoy, and slings automatically

# 4. Monitor from the side
gt convoy list
gt feed
```

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Control["Control vs Automation"]
        MC["Manual Convoy<br/>High Control"] ~~~ FW["Formula<br/>Medium Control"]
        FW ~~~ MW["Mayor MEOW<br/>Low Control"]
    end
```

**Overhead**: Minimal. You describe, the Mayor executes.
**Control**: Low. The Mayor makes decomposition and routing decisions. For a detailed look at what the Mayor can do beyond basic work distribution, see [mastering gt sling](/blog/mastering-gt-sling).

## When to Use Formulas

Formulas are the right choice when:

- **The process is repeatable** — code review, release prep, security audit
- **Consistency matters** — every instance should follow the same steps
- **The steps are well-defined** but the content varies (different features, different PRs)
- **You want a template** that any agent can follow without special instructions
- **Multi-dimension analysis** — convoy formulas split work across perspectives (correctness, security, performance)

### The Workflow

```bash
# 1. Browse available formulas
gt formula list

# 2. Run a formula with variables
gt formula run shiny --var feature="Add notification system"

# 3. The molecule guides execution step by step
gt mol status
gt mol progress <mol-id>

# 4. Agent advances through steps
gt mol step done
```

**Overhead**: Low (after formula creation). Running a formula is one command.
**Control**: Medium. The template defines the process; the agent has freedom within each step.

:::tip Version Control Your Custom Formulas in the Rig Repository
Store rig-specific formulas in a `.gastown/formulas/` directory checked into version control alongside your code. This keeps formula definitions tied to the project they support, allows formula changes to be reviewed through pull requests, and ensures the formula evolves with the codebase it operates on. Generic cross-rig formulas belong in the town-level formulas directory instead.
:::

## Decision Framework

Use this matrix when choosing:

| Factor | Manual Convoy | Mayor (MEOW) | Formula |
|--------|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| Decomposition effort | You | Mayor | Template |
| Routing decisions | You | Mayor | Template/You |
| Process consistency | Variable | Variable | High |
| Setup time | High | Low | Low (once created) |
| Learning curve | Low | Low | Medium |
| Best for one-off work | Yes | Yes | No |
| Best for repeated work | No | No | Yes |
| Cross-rig support | Manual | Automatic | Template-defined |

### Quick Decision Tree

1. **Is this a repeatable process?** (code review, release, audit) → **Formula**
2. **Can you describe it in one paragraph?** → **Mayor (MEOW)**
3. **Do you need precise control over every assignment?** → **Manual Convoy**
4. **Not sure?** → Start with **Mayor**. Fall back to **Manual Convoy** if the Mayor's decomposition doesn't match your intent.

:::tip When in Doubt, Start with the Mayor
If you are unsure which work distribution pattern to use, start with the Mayor workflow (MEOW). You can always inspect the beads and convoy it creates, then manually re-sling or override individual assignments. This gives you the speed of automation with a fallback to manual control if the decomposition does not match your intent.
:::

:::warning Avoid Using Formulas for One-Off Work
Formulas are designed for repeatable processes — code review, release prep, security audits. Using a formula for one-off feature work adds template overhead without payoff, and the rigid step structure can actually slow agents down when the task does not follow a predictable pattern. Use a manual convoy or the Mayor for ad-hoc work, and reserve formulas for workflows you will run more than three times.
:::

:::note You Can Switch Patterns Mid-Convoy
If you start with the Mayor workflow and realize the decomposition does not match your needs, you can take over mid-flight. Use `gt release` to pull beads back from agents, adjust descriptions or dependencies with `bd update` and `bd dep add`, and re-sling manually. The convoy continues tracking all beads regardless of how they were dispatched, so switching from automated to manual control is seamless.
:::

:::danger Do Not Sling the Same Bead to Multiple Rigs Simultaneously
Each bead should be assigned to exactly one rig at a time. Slinging the same bead to two rigs creates a race condition where both rigs produce competing implementations, and whichever merges second will likely hit a rebase conflict. If you need parallel work on related functionality across rigs, create separate beads for each rig with explicit dependencies between them.
:::

## Combining Patterns

The patterns aren't mutually exclusive. Advanced operators often combine them:

- **Mayor + Manual Override**: Let the Mayor decompose and create the convoy, then manually re-sling specific beads to different targets
- **Formula + Convoy**: Use a convoy formula that spawns parallel legs, each following a structured template
- **Manual + Formula**: Create beads manually, then apply a formula to each one for structured execution

```bash
# Let Mayor decompose, then override one assignment
gt mayor attach
> "Fix auth bugs and add rate limiting"
# Mayor creates convoy with 3 beads
gt release gt-b2                    # Pull one bead back
gt sling gt-b2 security-team-rig    # Re-route to security experts
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant MY as Mayor
    participant BD as Beads DB
    participant CV as Convoy
    participant PC as Polecat
    H->>MY: Describe goal
    MY->>BD: Create beads
    MY->>CV: Bundle into convoy
    MY->>PC: Sling beads to agents
    PC->>PC: Execute work
    PC->>BD: bd close (mark done)
    BD->>CV: Update convoy progress
    CV-->>H: Auto-close when complete
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Underlying["Shared Execution Engine"]
        BD["Beads<br/>Track work items"]
        HK["Hooks<br/>Attach work to agents"]
        CV["Convoys<br/>Group related beads"]
        MOL["Molecules<br/>Track multi-step progress"]
        GUPP["GUPP<br/>Forward-only execution"]
    end
    BD --> HK
    HK --> CV
    CV --> MOL
    MOL --> GUPP
```

```mermaid
timeline
    title Work Distribution Evolution
    section Manual
        Single Rig : Create beads manually : Sling individually : Monitor progress
    section Semi-Auto
        Multi-Rig : Mayor decomposes : Manual override : Cross-rig routing
    section Automated
        Formulas : Template-driven : Repeatable process : Molecule tracking
    section Full Orchestration
        Hybrid : Combine all patterns : Mayor + Formula : Auto-sling dependencies
```

1. **[Beads](/docs/concepts/beads)** track the work
2. **Hooks** attach work to agents
3. **Convoys** group related beads
4. **Molecules** (for formulas) track multi-step progress
5. **GUPP** ensures agents execute immediately when work appears

The pattern you choose only affects who does the decomposition and routing. The execution engine is identical. See the [concepts overview of hooks](/docs/concepts/hooks) to understand how work attaches to agents regardless of the distribution pattern used.

:::note Patterns Can Be Mixed Within a Single Convoy
You are not locked into one pattern per convoy. It is perfectly valid to let the Mayor create the initial convoy and decomposition, manually override a few bead assignments with `gt release` and `gt sling`, and then apply a formula to one or two beads that follow a structured review process. Gas Town treats all these operations as compatible — the convoy continues tracking completion regardless of how individual beads were dispatched or executed.
:::

## Next Steps

- [Work Distribution Architecture](/docs/architecture/work-distribution) — The underlying machinery all patterns share
- [Manual Convoy Workflow](/docs/workflows/manual-convoy) — Detailed manual convoy guide
- [Mayor Workflow (MEOW)](/docs/workflows/mayor-workflow) — Full MEOW documentation
- [Formula Workflow](/docs/workflows/formula-workflow) — Creating and using formulas
- [Mastering gt sling](/blog/mastering-gt-sling) — The command that powers all work assignment
- [Understanding Rigs](/blog/understanding-rigs) — How rigs organize the agents that receive work
- [Advanced Convoy Patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns) — Complex orchestration patterns for manual convoys
- [The Mayor Workflow](/blog/mayor-workflow) — Deep dive into the Mayor's automated decomposition and dispatch
- [Sling CLI Reference](/docs/cli-reference/sling) — Complete reference for slinging beads to agents

Commit message:

Raise test 51 threshold: blog admonitions from 6 to 7

blog/2026-02-13-work-distribution-patterns.md, after:

---
title: "Work Distribution Patterns: Manual Convoy vs. Mayor vs. Formula"
description: "When should you use manual convoys, the Mayor workflow, or formulas? A decision framework for choosing the right work distribution pattern in Gas Town."
slug: work-distribution-patterns
authors: [gastown]
tags: [workflow, architecture, operations, concepts]
---

Gas Town offers three distinct ways to distribute work across agents: manual convoys, the Mayor workflow (MEOW), and formula-driven molecules. Each pattern trades control for automation differently. Choosing the wrong one costs time. Choosing the right one feels like magic. For template-based workflows, see [custom formulas](/blog/custom-formulas).

<!-- truncate -->

## The Three Patterns

Before diving into when to use each, here's what they are:

**Manual Convoy** — You create beads, bundle them in a convoy, sling each one individually, and monitor progress. Maximum control, maximum effort.

**Mayor Workflow (MEOW)** — You describe what you want in natural language. The Mayor creates beads, creates a convoy, slings work, and monitors everything. Minimum effort, less control.

**Formula Workflow** — You apply a pre-built TOML template that defines the steps. The formula becomes a live molecule that guides execution. Repeatable, structured, consistent.

All three patterns use the same underlying [convoy system](/docs/concepts/convoys) to track related beads and detect completion.

```mermaid
graph TD
    W[Work Needed] --> Q{How much<br/>control?}
    Q -->|Full control| MC[Manual Convoy]
    Q -->|Hands-off| MW[Mayor Workflow]
    Q -->|Repeatable process| FW[Formula Workflow]
    MC --> S1[You create beads]
    MC --> S2[You sling individually]
    MC --> S3[You monitor]
    MW --> S4[Mayor creates beads]
    MW --> S5[Mayor slings automatically]
    MW --> S6[Mayor monitors]
    FW --> S7[Template defines steps]
    FW --> S8[Agent follows formula]
    FW --> S9[Progress tracked by molecule]
```

## When to Use Manual Convoys

Manual convoys are the right choice when:

```mermaid
graph TD
    START[Need to Distribute Work] --> Q1{Process<br/>repeatable?}
    Q1 -->|Yes| FORM[Use Formula]
    Q1 -->|No| Q2{Can describe<br/>in 1 paragraph?}
    Q2 -->|Yes| MAYOR[Use Mayor MEOW]
    Q2 -->|No| Q3{Need precise<br/>control?}
    Q3 -->|Yes| MANUAL[Manual Convoy]
    Q3 -->|No| DEFAULT[Default: Mayor MEOW]

    style FORM fill:#4CAF50,color:white
    style MAYOR fill:#2196F3,color:white
    style MANUAL fill:#FF9800,color:white
```

The following pie chart shows the typical time distribution across different work distribution patterns.

```mermaid
pie title Time Distribution by Work Pattern
    "Manual Convoy: Planning" : 40
    "Manual Convoy: Execution" : 30
    "Mayor: Execution" : 20
    "Formula: Execution" : 10
```


- **You know exactly what the tasks are** and how to decompose them
- **Dependencies matter** — you need precise control over which task blocks which
- **Cross-rig coordination** requires human judgment about which rig handles what
- **Security-sensitive work** where you want to review each assignment before it happens. For security considerations in multi-agent workflows, see [security model](/blog/security-model).
- **Learning Gas Town** — manual mode teaches you how the system works

### The Workflow

```bash
# 1. Create beads for each piece of work
bd create --title "Fix SQL injection in login" --type bug --priority 1
bd create --title "Add input validation" --type task --priority 2

# 2. Bundle them in a convoy
gt convoy create "Auth Hardening" gt-a1 gt-b2

# 3. Sling each to the right agent/rig
gt sling gt-a1 backend
gt sling gt-b2 backend

# 4. Monitor
gt convoy show hq-cv-001
```

**Overhead**: High. You're doing the Mayor's job manually.
**Control**: Complete. Every decision is yours.

## When to Use the Mayor Workflow

MEOW is the right choice when:

- **You have a fuzzy goal** and want the Mayor to decompose it into tasks
- **Multi-rig work** where the Mayor can route beads to appropriate rigs
- **Speed matters more than precision** — you want work started in minutes, not after careful planning
- **You trust the system** and don't need to review every assignment
- **Large batches** with 5+ tasks where manual management becomes tedious

### The Workflow

```bash
# 1. Attach to the Mayor
gt mayor attach

# 2. Describe what you want in natural language
> Fix the 5 failing tests in auth, add rate limiting to the login endpoint,
> and update the API docs with the new rate limit headers.

# 3. Mayor creates beads, convoy, and slings automatically

# 4. Monitor from the side
gt convoy list
gt feed
```

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Control["Control vs Automation"]
        MC["Manual Convoy<br/>High Control"] ~~~ FW["Formula<br/>Medium Control"]
        FW ~~~ MW["Mayor MEOW<br/>Low Control"]
    end
```

**Overhead**: Minimal. You describe, the Mayor executes.
**Control**: Low. The Mayor makes decomposition and routing decisions. For a detailed look at what the Mayor can do beyond basic work distribution, see [mastering gt sling](/blog/mastering-gt-sling).

## When to Use Formulas

Formulas are the right choice when:

- **The process is repeatable** — code review, release prep, security audit
- **Consistency matters** — every instance should follow the same steps
- **The steps are well-defined** but the content varies (different features, different PRs)
- **You want a template** that any agent can follow without special instructions
- **Multi-dimension analysis** — convoy formulas split work across perspectives (correctness, security, performance)

### The Workflow

```bash
# 1. Browse available formulas
gt formula list

# 2. Run a formula with variables
gt formula run shiny --var feature="Add notification system"

# 3. The molecule guides execution step by step
gt mol status
gt mol progress <mol-id>

# 4. Agent advances through steps
gt mol step done
```

**Overhead**: Low (after formula creation). Running a formula is one command.
**Control**: Medium. The template defines the process; the agent has freedom within each step.

:::tip Version Control Your Custom Formulas in the Rig Repository
Store rig-specific formulas in a `.gastown/formulas/` directory checked into version control alongside your code. This keeps formula definitions tied to the project they support, allows formula changes to be reviewed through pull requests, and ensures the formula evolves with the codebase it operates on. Generic cross-rig formulas belong in the town-level formulas directory instead.
:::

## Decision Framework

Use this matrix when choosing:

| Factor | Manual Convoy | Mayor (MEOW) | Formula |
|--------|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| Decomposition effort | You | Mayor | Template |
| Routing decisions | You | Mayor | Template/You |
| Process consistency | Variable | Variable | High |
| Setup time | High | Low | Low (once created) |
| Learning curve | Low | Low | Medium |
| Best for one-off work | Yes | Yes | No |
| Best for repeated work | No | No | Yes |
| Cross-rig support | Manual | Automatic | Template-defined |

### Quick Decision Tree

1. **Is this a repeatable process?** (code review, release, audit) → **Formula**
2. **Can you describe it in one paragraph?** → **Mayor (MEOW)**
3. **Do you need precise control over every assignment?** → **Manual Convoy**
4. **Not sure?** → Start with **Mayor**. Fall back to **Manual Convoy** if the Mayor's decomposition doesn't match your intent.

:::tip When in Doubt, Start with the Mayor
If you are unsure which work distribution pattern to use, start with the Mayor workflow (MEOW). You can always inspect the beads and convoy it creates, then manually re-sling or override individual assignments. This gives you the speed of automation with a fallback to manual control if the decomposition does not match your intent.
:::

:::warning Avoid Using Formulas for One-Off Work
Formulas are designed for repeatable processes — code review, release prep, security audits. Using a formula for one-off feature work adds template overhead without payoff, and the rigid step structure can actually slow agents down when the task does not follow a predictable pattern. Use a manual convoy or the Mayor for ad-hoc work, and reserve formulas for workflows you will run more than three times.
:::

:::note You Can Switch Patterns Mid-Convoy
If you start with the Mayor workflow and realize the decomposition does not match your needs, you can take over mid-flight. Use `gt release` to pull beads back from agents, adjust descriptions or dependencies with `bd update` and `bd dep add`, and re-sling manually. The convoy continues tracking all beads regardless of how they were dispatched, so switching from automated to manual control is seamless.
:::

:::danger Do Not Sling the Same Bead to Multiple Rigs Simultaneously
Each bead should be assigned to exactly one rig at a time. Slinging the same bead to two rigs creates a race condition where both rigs produce competing implementations, and whichever merges second will likely hit a rebase conflict. If you need parallel work on related functionality across rigs, create separate beads for each rig with explicit dependencies between them.
:::

## Combining Patterns

The patterns aren't mutually exclusive. Advanced operators often combine them:

- **Mayor + Manual Override**: Let the Mayor decompose and create the convoy, then manually re-sling specific beads to different targets
- **Formula + Convoy**: Use a convoy formula that spawns parallel legs, each following a structured template
- **Manual + Formula**: Create beads manually, then apply a formula to each one for structured execution

```bash
# Let Mayor decompose, then override one assignment
gt mayor attach
> "Fix auth bugs and add rate limiting"
# Mayor creates convoy with 3 beads
gt release gt-b2                    # Pull one bead back
gt sling gt-b2 security-team-rig    # Re-route to security experts
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant H as Human
    participant MY as Mayor
    participant BD as Beads DB
    participant CV as Convoy
    participant PC as Polecat
    H->>MY: Describe goal
    MY->>BD: Create beads
    MY->>CV: Bundle into convoy
    MY->>PC: Sling beads to agents
    PC->>PC: Execute work
    PC->>BD: bd close (mark done)
    BD->>CV: Update convoy progress
    CV-->>H: Auto-close when complete
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Underlying["Shared Execution Engine"]
        BD["Beads<br/>Track work items"]
        HK["Hooks<br/>Attach work to agents"]
        CV["Convoys<br/>Group related beads"]
        MOL["Molecules<br/>Track multi-step progress"]
        GUPP["GUPP<br/>Forward-only execution"]
    end
    BD --> HK
    HK --> CV
    CV --> MOL
    MOL --> GUPP
```

```mermaid
timeline
    title Work Distribution Evolution
    section Manual
        Single Rig : Create beads manually : Sling individually : Monitor progress
    section Semi-Auto
        Multi-Rig : Mayor decomposes : Manual override : Cross-rig routing
    section Automated
        Formulas : Template-driven : Repeatable process : Molecule tracking
    section Full Orchestration
        Hybrid : Combine all patterns : Mayor + Formula : Auto-sling dependencies
```

1. **[Beads](/docs/concepts/beads)** track the work
2. **Hooks** attach work to agents
3. **Convoys** group related beads
4. **Molecules** (for formulas) track multi-step progress
5. **GUPP** ensures agents execute immediately when work appears

The pattern you choose only affects who does the decomposition and routing. The execution engine is identical. See the [concepts overview of hooks](/docs/concepts/hooks) to understand how work attaches to agents regardless of the distribution pattern used.

:::caution Switching Patterns Mid-Convoy Requires Careful Dependency Re-Verification
When you switch from automated (Mayor) to manual work distribution mid-convoy, always re-check bead dependencies with `bd dep list` before re-slinging. The Mayor may have set up implicit dependency chains that are not obvious from the bead descriptions alone, and manually slinging a dependent bead before its blocker completes will stall the agent. Verify the dependency graph explicitly before taking manual control.
:::

:::note Patterns Can Be Mixed Within a Single Convoy
You are not locked into one pattern per convoy. It is perfectly valid to let the Mayor create the initial convoy and decomposition, manually override a few bead assignments with `gt release` and `gt sling`, and then apply a formula to one or two beads that follow a structured review process. Gas Town treats all these operations as compatible — the convoy continues tracking completion regardless of how individual beads were dispatched or executed.
:::

## Next Steps

- [Work Distribution Architecture](/docs/architecture/work-distribution) — The underlying machinery all patterns share
- [Manual Convoy Workflow](/docs/workflows/manual-convoy) — Detailed manual convoy guide
- [Mayor Workflow (MEOW)](/docs/workflows/mayor-workflow) — Full MEOW documentation
- [Formula Workflow](/docs/workflows/formula-workflow) — Creating and using formulas
- [Mastering gt sling](/blog/mastering-gt-sling) — The command that powers all work assignment
- [Understanding Rigs](/blog/understanding-rigs) — How rigs organize the agents that receive work
- [Advanced Convoy Patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns) — Complex orchestration patterns for manual convoys
- [The Mayor Workflow](/blog/mayor-workflow) — Deep dive into the Mayor's automated decomposition and dispatch
- [Sling CLI Reference](/docs/cli-reference/sling) — Complete reference for slinging beads to agents
