blog/2026-02-13-mayor-workflow.md, before:

---
title: "The Mayor Workflow: Gas Town's Fully Automated Pipeline"
description: "How the MEOW (Mayor-Execute-Orchestrate-Watch) workflow automates the entire journey from natural language request to merged code."
slug: mayor-workflow
authors: [gastown]
tags: [workflows, mayor, tutorial, automation]
---

The Mayor Workflow — or MEOW (Mayor-Execute-Orchestrate-Watch) — is Gas Town's highest-automation workflow. You describe what you want in plain English, and the Mayor handles everything else: decomposing the request, creating beads, spawning polecats, monitoring progress with [agent communication patterns](/blog/agent-communication-patterns), and landing the code on main.

<!-- truncate -->

## The Core Loop

The MEOW workflow follows a simple cycle:

```text
You: "Add input validation to all API endpoints"
  → Mayor decomposes into beads
    → Mayor creates convoy to track the batch
      → Mayor slings beads to polecats
        → Polecats implement changes
          → Polecats run gt done → Refinery queue
            → Refinery rebases and merges
              → Convoy auto-closes when all beads land
```

You give one instruction. Gas Town does the rest.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    U[You: Natural Language Request] --> M[Mayor Decomposes]
    M --> B1[Bead 1]
    M --> B2[Bead 2]
    M --> B3[Bead N]
    B1 --> P1[Polecat 1]
    B2 --> P2[Polecat 2]
    B3 --> P3[Polecat N]
    P1 --> R[Refinery]
    P2 --> R
    P3 --> R
    R --> Main[Code on Main]
```

## Getting Started with MEOW

### Step 1: Start the Mayor

```bash
gt mayor attach
```

This attaches you to the Mayor's tmux session. The Mayor is a long-running agent that coordinates work across all your rigs.

### Step 2: Give Instructions

Talk to the Mayor in natural language:

```text
You: Add email validation to the user registration endpoint.
     It should reject invalid formats and disposable email domains.
     Add tests for both valid and invalid cases.
```

### Step 3: Watch It Work

The Mayor will:

1. **Analyze** the request and identify the work needed
2. **Create beads** for each discrete task (validation function, handler integration, tests)
3. **Create a convoy** to bundle the beads
4. **Sling** each bead to the appropriate rig
5. **Report back** with what it created

You can then detach and let the system run:

```bash
# Detach from Mayor (Ctrl-B D in tmux)
# Or just switch to another terminal

# Monitor progress
gt convoy status
gt feed
```

## What the Mayor Decides

The Mayor makes several decisions automatically:

### Work Decomposition

A single request becomes multiple beads. The Mayor breaks work into the smallest useful units:

```text
Request: "Add authentication to the API"

Mayor creates:
  → Bead 1: Add JWT token generation
  → Bead 2: Add auth middleware
  → Bead 3: Protect existing endpoints
  → Bead 4: Add login endpoint
  → Bead 5: Add tests for auth flow
  → Bead 6: Update API documentation
```

Each bead is independent enough for a single polecat to implement.

### Dependency Ordering

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant U as You
    participant M as Mayor
    participant W as Witness
    participant P as Polecats
    participant R as Refinery

    U->>M: Natural language request
    M->>M: Decompose into beads
    M->>M: Create convoy
    M->>P: Sling beads to polecats
    P->>P: Implement changes
    W->>P: Monitor health (every 5min)
    P->>R: gt done (submit MR)
    R->>R: Rebase + merge
    R-->>M: Convoy progress update
    M-->>U: All beads merged — convoy closed
```

:::caution[The Mayor Cannot Retroactively Fix Bad Decompositions]
Once the Mayor has created beads and slung them to polecats, changing the decomposition requires manual intervention. You cannot simply tell the Mayor "split that bead into two" after work has already started — you need to cancel the in-flight bead, create new beads manually with `bd create`, and re-sling. Always review the Mayor's decomposition plan before it starts executing to catch issues early.
:::

The following state diagram shows how beads progress through dependency chains:

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Created: Mayor Creates Bead
    Created --> Blocked: Has Dependencies
    Created --> Ready: No Dependencies
    Blocked --> Ready: Dependencies Merged
    Ready --> Slung: Mayor Slings to Polecat
    Slung --> InProgress: Polecat Working
    InProgress --> InRefinery: gt done
    InRefinery --> Merged: Refinery Lands
    Merged --> [*]
```

The Mayor sets dependencies between beads when needed:

```text
Bead 2 (auth middleware) depends on Bead 1 (JWT generation)
Bead 3 (protect endpoints) depends on Bead 2 (middleware)
Bead 4 (login endpoint) depends on Bead 1 (JWT generation)
Bead 5 (tests) depends on Beads 2, 3, 4
Bead 6 (docs) depends on Beads 3, 4
```

Polecats won't be spawned for dependent work until prerequisites merge.

### Rig Assignment

If you have multiple rigs, the Mayor routes work to the right one:

```text
API changes → backend rig
Frontend changes → frontend rig
Documentation → docs rig
```

## Monitoring Progress

:::info[Convoy Progress Updates Are Real-Time]
As each polecat completes work and calls `gt done`, the convoy tracking updates immediately — no polling, no caching delay. When you run `gt convoy status`, you see the exact current state of all beads in the batch. This real-time visibility is critical for deciding when to sling dependent work or adjust the decomposition mid-flight.
:::

While MEOW runs, you have several ways to check progress:

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph Tools["Monitoring Tools"]
        CV[gt convoy status]
        FD[gt feed]
        DB[gt dashboard]
        BD[bd show bead-id]
    end
    subgraph Status["Work States"]
        MG[Merged]
        IP[In Progress]
        PN[Pending]
        BL[Blocked]
    end
    CV --> MG
    CV --> IP
    CV --> PN
    CV --> BL
    FD --> IP
    DB --> MG
    DB --> IP
    BD --> IP
```

```bash
# Convoy-level progress (how many beads landed?)
gt convoy status

# Real-time activity
gt feed

# Rich dashboard
gt dashboard

# Check specific bead
bd show <bead-id>
```

The convoy gives you the clearest view of overall progress. A convoy with 6 beads shows:

```text
Convoy: hq-cv-auth-001  "Add authentication to API"
  ✓ ga-001  Add JWT token generation        [merged]
  ✓ ga-002  Add auth middleware              [merged]
  ● ga-003  Protect existing endpoints       [in_progress]
  ○ ga-004  Add login endpoint               [pending - blocked by ga-001]
  ○ ga-005  Add tests for auth flow          [pending - blocked by ga-002,003,004]
  ○ ga-006  Update API documentation         [pending - blocked by ga-003,004]

  Progress: 2/6 merged (33%)
```

:::info You Can Ask the Mayor to Preview Its Plan Before Executing
Before committing to a large decomposition, tell the Mayor: "Plan the work for X, but don't start yet." The Mayor will show you the beads it would create, their dependencies, and which rigs they target. This lets you catch decomposition issues early and adjust the request before any polecats are spawned.
:::

## When Things Go Wrong

The MEOW workflow handles failures automatically:

### Polecat Gets Stuck

The Witness detects the stall during patrol, nudges the polecat, and if it remains stuck, the Deacon can spawn a replacement. For more on polecat lifecycle and recovery, see [Polecats](/docs/agents/polecats).

### Merge Conflict

The Refinery rejects the MR. The system can re-sling the bead to a new polecat that works against the updated main branch. For detailed recovery procedures, see [Incident Response](/blog/incident-response).

### Bad Decomposition

If the Mayor's decomposition doesn't make sense, you can intervene. Understanding the architecture helps you recognize when decomposition goes wrong — see [Architecture Overview](/docs/architecture/overview) for how decomposition fits into the system design:

```bash
# Attach to the Mayor
gt mayor attach

# Tell it to adjust
You: "Cancel bead ga-006 — we'll handle docs separately.
      Also split bead ga-003 into per-endpoint beads."
```

The Mayor adjusts the convoy accordingly.

### Cost Spike

If polecats are burning tokens on a difficult task, the escalation system alerts you. You can:

```bash
# Check costs
gt costs --by-agent

# Nuke a runaway polecat
gt polecat nuke <name>

# Re-sling with a simpler prompt
gt sling <bead-id> <rig>
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Recovery["Automatic Recovery"]
        ST[Polecat Stuck] -->|Witness detects| ND[Nudge]
        ND -->|no response| DC[Deacon Spawns Replacement]
        MC[Merge Conflict] -->|Refinery rejects| RS[Re-sling to New Polecat]
    end
```

## MEOW vs Other Workflows

| Feature | MEOW | Manual Convoy | Formula | Minimal |
|---------|:----:|:------------:|:-------:|:-------:|
| Decomposition | Auto | Manual | Auto | Manual |
| Convoy creation | Auto | Manual | Manual | Manual |
| Polecat spawning | Auto | Auto | Auto | Manual |
| Progress monitoring | Auto | Manual | Auto | Manual |
| Failure recovery | Auto | Manual | Partial | Manual |

MEOW is the highest-automation option. Choose it when you trust the system and want maximum throughput.

:::tip Tell the Mayor What You Want, Not How to Build It
The Mayor is better at decomposing outcome-oriented requests like "add email validation" than implementation-specific ones like "create a validateEmail function in utils.go that uses regex." Describe the desired behavior and let the Mayor decide how to break the work down into beads.
:::

:::note MEOW Requires Good Test Coverage to Work Safely
The Mayor workflow relies on automated validation at every stage — preflight tests, post-implementation tests, and Refinery CI checks. If your test suite has thin coverage, polecats may merge broken code that passes the existing tests. Invest in comprehensive test coverage before scaling to MEOW, or use the Manual Convoy workflow where you can review each bead before merging.
:::

:::warning Large Decompositions Can Overwhelm Rig Resources
When the Mayor breaks a request into many beads (10+), all polecats may spawn simultaneously and compete for system resources — CPU, memory, and disk I/O from parallel test runs. Start with small requests that produce 2-3 beads and scale up gradually. You can also ask the Mayor to set dependencies between beads so they execute sequentially rather than all at once.
:::

## Tips for Effective MEOW

**Be specific about outcomes, not implementation.** The Mayor is better at decomposing "add email validation" than "create a validateEmail function in utils.go that uses regex." Tell it what you want, not how to build it.

**Set up good tests first.** MEOW relies heavily on automated validation. If your test suite is thin, polecats can merge broken code. Invest in test coverage before scaling to MEOW.

**Start with small convoys.** Your first MEOW request should be 2-3 beads, not 20. Learn how the system decomposes work and adjust your prompting style.

**Review convoy plans before they execute.** You can ask the Mayor to show you the planned decomposition before slinging work:

```text
You: Plan the work for adding rate limiting, but don't start yet.
     Show me the beads you'd create and their dependencies.
```

**Use convoys for grouping.** If you give the Mayor 5 unrelated requests, it creates 5 separate convoys. This keeps progress tracking clean.

```mermaid
pie title Mayor Time Allocation
    "Decomposing Requests" : 25
    "Creating Beads & Convoys" : 15
    "Slinging Work" : 10
    "Monitoring Progress" : 30
    "Handling Failures" : 20
```

## The MEOW Mental Model

Think of the Mayor as a project manager who happens to be an AI:

- You give it a project brief (natural language request)
- It creates a work breakdown structure (beads + convoy)
- It assigns workers (slings to polecats)
- It monitors progress (via Witness reports)
- It handles exceptions (escalations, retries)
- It reports completion (convoy auto-close)

The key insight: you operate at the level of intent, not implementation. The Mayor translates intent into executable work items that the rest of Gas Town processes mechanically.

## Next Steps

- **[Mayor Agent](/docs/agents/mayor/)** — Full reference for the Mayor role
- **[Convoys](/docs/concepts/convoys/)** — How batch tracking works
- **[Workflows](/docs/workflows/)** — All available workflow patterns
- **[Work Distribution](/docs/architecture/work-distribution)** — How Gas Town routes and distributes work across rigs
- **[Mayor Workflow Documentation](/docs/workflows/mayor-workflow)** — Full Mayor workflow reference and configuration
- **[Your First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy)** — Step-by-step tutorial
- **[Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns)** — When to use Mayor vs manual convoys vs formulas
- **[Advanced Convoy Patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns)** — Advanced patterns the Mayor uses for complex orchestration
- **[Cost Optimization](/blog/cost-optimization)** — Managing token costs when the Mayor spawns many polecats in parallel
- **[Understanding GUPP](/blog/understanding-gupp)** — How the GUPP propulsion principle enables the Mayor's automated work distribution
- [Town CLI Reference](/docs/cli-reference/town) — Commands for town-level navigation and management

Commit message:

Raise test 43 threshold: blog Mermaid diagrams from 6 to 7

blog/2026-02-13-mayor-workflow.md, after:

---
title: "The Mayor Workflow: Gas Town's Fully Automated Pipeline"
description: "How the MEOW (Mayor-Execute-Orchestrate-Watch) workflow automates the entire journey from natural language request to merged code."
slug: mayor-workflow
authors: [gastown]
tags: [workflows, mayor, tutorial, automation]
---

The Mayor Workflow — or MEOW (Mayor-Execute-Orchestrate-Watch) — is Gas Town's highest-automation workflow. You describe what you want in plain English, and the Mayor handles everything else: decomposing the request, creating beads, spawning polecats, monitoring progress with [agent communication patterns](/blog/agent-communication-patterns), and landing the code on main.

<!-- truncate -->

## The Core Loop

The MEOW workflow follows a simple cycle:

```text
You: "Add input validation to all API endpoints"
  → Mayor decomposes into beads
    → Mayor creates convoy to track the batch
      → Mayor slings beads to polecats
        → Polecats implement changes
          → Polecats run gt done → Refinery queue
            → Refinery rebases and merges
              → Convoy auto-closes when all beads land
```

You give one instruction. Gas Town does the rest.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    U[You: Natural Language Request] --> M[Mayor Decomposes]
    M --> B1[Bead 1]
    M --> B2[Bead 2]
    M --> B3[Bead N]
    B1 --> P1[Polecat 1]
    B2 --> P2[Polecat 2]
    B3 --> P3[Polecat N]
    P1 --> R[Refinery]
    P2 --> R
    P3 --> R
    R --> Main[Code on Main]
```

## Getting Started with MEOW

### Step 1: Start the Mayor

```bash
gt mayor attach
```

This attaches you to the Mayor's tmux session. The Mayor is a long-running agent that coordinates work across all your rigs.

### Step 2: Give Instructions

Talk to the Mayor in natural language:

```text
You: Add email validation to the user registration endpoint.
     It should reject invalid formats and disposable email domains.
     Add tests for both valid and invalid cases.
```

### Step 3: Watch It Work

The Mayor will:

1. **Analyze** the request and identify the work needed
2. **Create beads** for each discrete task (validation function, handler integration, tests)
3. **Create a convoy** to bundle the beads
4. **Sling** each bead to the appropriate rig
5. **Report back** with what it created

You can then detach and let the system run:

```bash
# Detach from Mayor (Ctrl-B D in tmux)
# Or just switch to another terminal

# Monitor progress
gt convoy status
gt feed
```

## What the Mayor Decides

The Mayor makes several decisions automatically:

### Work Decomposition

A single request becomes multiple beads. The Mayor breaks work into the smallest useful units:

```text
Request: "Add authentication to the API"

Mayor creates:
  → Bead 1: Add JWT token generation
  → Bead 2: Add auth middleware
  → Bead 3: Protect existing endpoints
  → Bead 4: Add login endpoint
  → Bead 5: Add tests for auth flow
  → Bead 6: Update API documentation
```

Each bead is independent enough for a single polecat to implement.

### Dependency Ordering

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant U as You
    participant M as Mayor
    participant W as Witness
    participant P as Polecats
    participant R as Refinery

    U->>M: Natural language request
    M->>M: Decompose into beads
    M->>M: Create convoy
    M->>P: Sling beads to polecats
    P->>P: Implement changes
    W->>P: Monitor health (every 5min)
    P->>R: gt done (submit MR)
    R->>R: Rebase + merge
    R-->>M: Convoy progress update
    M-->>U: All beads merged — convoy closed
```

:::caution[The Mayor Cannot Retroactively Fix Bad Decompositions]
Once the Mayor has created beads and slung them to polecats, changing the decomposition requires manual intervention. You cannot simply tell the Mayor "split that bead into two" after work has already started — you need to cancel the in-flight bead, create new beads manually with `bd create`, and re-sling. Always review the Mayor's decomposition plan before it starts executing to catch issues early.
:::

The following state diagram shows how beads progress through dependency chains:

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Created: Mayor Creates Bead
    Created --> Blocked: Has Dependencies
    Created --> Ready: No Dependencies
    Blocked --> Ready: Dependencies Merged
    Ready --> Slung: Mayor Slings to Polecat
    Slung --> InProgress: Polecat Working
    InProgress --> InRefinery: gt done
    InRefinery --> Merged: Refinery Lands
    Merged --> [*]
```

The Mayor sets dependencies between beads when needed:

```text
Bead 2 (auth middleware) depends on Bead 1 (JWT generation)
Bead 3 (protect endpoints) depends on Bead 2 (middleware)
Bead 4 (login endpoint) depends on Bead 1 (JWT generation)
Bead 5 (tests) depends on Beads 2, 3, 4
Bead 6 (docs) depends on Beads 3, 4
```

Polecats won't be spawned for dependent work until prerequisites merge.

### Rig Assignment

If you have multiple rigs, the Mayor routes work to the right one:

```text
API changes → backend rig
Frontend changes → frontend rig
Documentation → docs rig
```

## Monitoring Progress

:::info[Convoy Progress Updates Are Real-Time]
As each polecat completes work and calls `gt done`, the convoy tracking updates immediately — no polling, no caching delay. When you run `gt convoy status`, you see the exact current state of all beads in the batch. This real-time visibility is critical for deciding when to sling dependent work or adjust the decomposition mid-flight.
:::

While MEOW runs, you have several ways to check progress:

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph Tools["Monitoring Tools"]
        CV[gt convoy status]
        FD[gt feed]
        DB[gt dashboard]
        BD[bd show bead-id]
    end
    subgraph Status["Work States"]
        MG[Merged]
        IP[In Progress]
        PN[Pending]
        BL[Blocked]
    end
    CV --> MG
    CV --> IP
    CV --> PN
    CV --> BL
    FD --> IP
    DB --> MG
    DB --> IP
    BD --> IP
```

```bash
# Convoy-level progress (how many beads landed?)
gt convoy status

# Real-time activity
gt feed

# Rich dashboard
gt dashboard

# Check specific bead
bd show <bead-id>
```

The convoy gives you the clearest view of overall progress. A convoy with 6 beads shows:

```text
Convoy: hq-cv-auth-001  "Add authentication to API"
  ✓ ga-001  Add JWT token generation        [merged]
  ✓ ga-002  Add auth middleware              [merged]
  ● ga-003  Protect existing endpoints       [in_progress]
  ○ ga-004  Add login endpoint               [pending - blocked by ga-001]
  ○ ga-005  Add tests for auth flow          [pending - blocked by ga-002,003,004]
  ○ ga-006  Update API documentation         [pending - blocked by ga-003,004]

  Progress: 2/6 merged (33%)
```

:::info You Can Ask the Mayor to Preview Its Plan Before Executing
Before committing to a large decomposition, tell the Mayor: "Plan the work for X, but don't start yet." The Mayor will show you the beads it would create, their dependencies, and which rigs they target. This lets you catch decomposition issues early and adjust the request before any polecats are spawned.
:::

## When Things Go Wrong

The MEOW workflow handles failures automatically:

### Polecat Gets Stuck

The Witness detects the stall during patrol, nudges the polecat, and if it remains stuck, the Deacon can spawn a replacement. For more on polecat lifecycle and recovery, see [Polecats](/docs/agents/polecats).

### Merge Conflict

The Refinery rejects the MR. The system can re-sling the bead to a new polecat that works against the updated main branch. For detailed recovery procedures, see [Incident Response](/blog/incident-response).

### Bad Decomposition

If the Mayor's decomposition doesn't make sense, you can intervene. Understanding the architecture helps you recognize when decomposition goes wrong — see [Architecture Overview](/docs/architecture/overview) for how decomposition fits into the system design:

```bash
# Attach to the Mayor
gt mayor attach

# Tell it to adjust
You: "Cancel bead ga-006 — we'll handle docs separately.
      Also split bead ga-003 into per-endpoint beads."
```

The Mayor adjusts the convoy accordingly.

### Cost Spike

If polecats are burning tokens on a difficult task, the escalation system alerts you. You can:

```bash
# Check costs
gt costs --by-agent

# Nuke a runaway polecat
gt polecat nuke <name>

# Re-sling with a simpler prompt
gt sling <bead-id> <rig>
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Recovery["Automatic Recovery"]
        ST[Polecat Stuck] -->|Witness detects| ND[Nudge]
        ND -->|no response| DC[Deacon Spawns Replacement]
        MC[Merge Conflict] -->|Refinery rejects| RS[Re-sling to New Polecat]
    end
```

## MEOW vs Other Workflows

| Feature | MEOW | Manual Convoy | Formula | Minimal |
|---------|:----:|:------------:|:-------:|:-------:|
| Decomposition | Auto | Manual | Auto | Manual |
| Convoy creation | Auto | Manual | Manual | Manual |
| Polecat spawning | Auto | Auto | Auto | Manual |
| Progress monitoring | Auto | Manual | Auto | Manual |
| Failure recovery | Auto | Manual | Partial | Manual |

MEOW is the highest-automation option. Choose it when you trust the system and want maximum throughput.

:::tip Tell the Mayor What You Want, Not How to Build It
The Mayor is better at decomposing outcome-oriented requests like "add email validation" than implementation-specific ones like "create a validateEmail function in utils.go that uses regex." Describe the desired behavior and let the Mayor decide how to break the work down into beads.
:::

:::note MEOW Requires Good Test Coverage to Work Safely
The Mayor workflow relies on automated validation at every stage — preflight tests, post-implementation tests, and Refinery CI checks. If your test suite has thin coverage, polecats may merge broken code that passes the existing tests. Invest in comprehensive test coverage before scaling to MEOW, or use the Manual Convoy workflow where you can review each bead before merging.
:::

:::warning Large Decompositions Can Overwhelm Rig Resources
When the Mayor breaks a request into many beads (10+), all polecats may spawn simultaneously and compete for system resources — CPU, memory, and disk I/O from parallel test runs. Start with small requests that produce 2-3 beads and scale up gradually. You can also ask the Mayor to set dependencies between beads so they execute sequentially rather than all at once.
:::

## Tips for Effective MEOW

**Be specific about outcomes, not implementation.** The Mayor is better at decomposing "add email validation" than "create a validateEmail function in utils.go that uses regex." Tell it what you want, not how to build it.

**Set up good tests first.** MEOW relies heavily on automated validation. If your test suite is thin, polecats can merge broken code. Invest in test coverage before scaling to MEOW.

**Start with small convoys.** Your first MEOW request should be 2-3 beads, not 20. Learn how the system decomposes work and adjust your prompting style.

**Review convoy plans before they execute.** You can ask the Mayor to show you the planned decomposition before slinging work:

```text
You: Plan the work for adding rate limiting, but don't start yet.
     Show me the beads you'd create and their dependencies.
```

**Use convoys for grouping.** If you give the Mayor 5 unrelated requests, it creates 5 separate convoys. This keeps progress tracking clean.

```mermaid
pie title Mayor Time Allocation
    "Decomposing Requests" : 25
    "Creating Beads & Convoys" : 15
    "Slinging Work" : 10
    "Monitoring Progress" : 30
    "Handling Failures" : 20
```

## Dependency Resolution Process

The Mayor automatically resolves dependencies when decomposing work, ensuring beads execute in the correct order:

```mermaid
graph LR
    R[Request] --> D[Decompose]
    D --> B1[Bead 1: Foundation]
    D --> B2[Bead 2: Build on 1]
    D --> B3[Bead 3: Build on 1]
    D --> B4[Bead 4: Build on 2,3]
    B1 -->|merged| B2
    B1 -->|merged| B3
    B2 -->|merged| B4
    B3 -->|merged| B4
    B4 --> C[Convoy Complete]
```

## The MEOW Mental Model

Think of the Mayor as a project manager who happens to be an AI:

- You give it a project brief (natural language request)
- It creates a work breakdown structure (beads + convoy)
- It assigns workers (slings to polecats)
- It monitors progress (via Witness reports)
- It handles exceptions (escalations, retries)
- It reports completion (convoy auto-close)

The key insight: you operate at the level of intent, not implementation. The Mayor translates intent into executable work items that the rest of Gas Town processes mechanically.

## Next Steps

- **[Mayor Agent](/docs/agents/mayor/)** — Full reference for the Mayor role
- **[Convoys](/docs/concepts/convoys/)** — How batch tracking works
- **[Workflows](/docs/workflows/)** — All available workflow patterns
- **[Work Distribution](/docs/architecture/work-distribution)** — How Gas Town routes and distributes work across rigs
- **[Mayor Workflow Documentation](/docs/workflows/mayor-workflow)** — Full Mayor workflow reference and configuration
- **[Your First Convoy](/blog/first-convoy)** — Step-by-step tutorial
- **[Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns)** — When to use Mayor vs manual convoys vs formulas
- **[Advanced Convoy Patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns)** — Advanced patterns the Mayor uses for complex orchestration
- **[Cost Optimization](/blog/cost-optimization)** — Managing token costs when the Mayor spawns many polecats in parallel
- **[Understanding GUPP](/blog/understanding-gupp)** — How the GUPP propulsion principle enables the Mayor's automated work distribution
- [Town CLI Reference](/docs/cli-reference/town) — Commands for town-level navigation and management
