docs/cli-reference/refinery-commands.md, before:

---
title: "gt refinery"
sidebar_position: 11
description: "Manage the Refinery, the per-rig merge queue processor that serializes all merges to main. Start, stop, monitor, and inspect merge requests."
---

# gt refinery

Manage the Refinery -- the per-rig merge queue processor.

```bash
gt refinery [command] [flags]
```

**Alias:** `gt ref`

## Description

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    P[Polecat: gt done] -->|submit MR| Q[Merge Queue]
    Q --> CL[gt refinery claim]
    CL --> RB[Rebase onto main]
    RB --> VAL[Run validation]
    VAL -->|pass| MRG[Merge to main]
    VAL -->|fail| REL[gt refinery release]
    REL --> Q
```

The Refinery serializes all merges to main for a rig:

1. Receives MRs submitted by polecats (via `gt done`)
2. Rebases work branches onto latest main
3. Runs validation (tests, builds, checks)
4. Merges to main when clear
5. If conflict: spawns a fresh polecat to re-implement (original is already gone)

One Refinery per rig. It is a persistent agent that processes work as it arrives. The polecat is already nuked by the time the Refinery processes its MR.

:::tip
The Refinery runs automatically as a persistent agent. You rarely need these commands in normal operation — they're primarily for debugging and manual intervention. For a comprehensive understanding of how the Refinery processes work, see [Refinery Deep Dive](/blog/refinery-deep-dive).
:::

**Role shortcuts:** `refinery` in mail/nudge addresses resolves to the current rig's Refinery.

## Subcommands

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| [`start`](#gt-refinery-start) | Start the Refinery |
| [`stop`](#gt-refinery-stop) | Stop the Refinery |
| [`restart`](#gt-refinery-restart) | Restart the Refinery |
| [`status`](#gt-refinery-status) | Show Refinery status |
| [`attach`](#gt-refinery-attach) | Attach to Refinery session |
| [`queue`](#gt-refinery-queue) | Show merge queue |
| [`ready`](#gt-refinery-ready) | List MRs ready for processing |
| [`blocked`](#gt-refinery-blocked) | List MRs blocked by open tasks |
| [`unclaimed`](#gt-refinery-unclaimed) | List unclaimed MRs |
| [`claim`](#gt-refinery-claim) | Claim an MR for processing |
| [`release`](#gt-refinery-release) | Release a claimed MR |

---

## gt refinery start

Start the Refinery for a rig.

```bash
gt refinery start [rig] [flags]
```

**Alias:** `gt refinery spawn`

Launches the merge queue processor which monitors for polecat work branches and merges them to the appropriate target branches. If rig is not specified, infers it from the current directory.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agent <alias>` | Agent alias to run the Refinery with (overrides town default) |
| `--foreground` | Run in foreground (default: background) |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery start myproject
gt refinery start myproject --foreground
gt refinery start              # infer rig from cwd
```

---

## gt refinery stop

Gracefully stop a running Refinery.

```bash
gt refinery stop [rig] [flags]
```

Completes any in-progress merge first, then stops. If rig is not specified, infers it from the current directory.

---

## gt refinery restart

Restart the Refinery for a rig.

```bash
gt refinery restart [rig] [flags]
```

Stops the current session (if running) and starts a fresh one.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agent <alias>` | Agent alias to run the Refinery with (overrides town default) |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery restart myproject
gt refinery restart             # infer rig from cwd
```

---

## gt refinery status

Show Refinery status for a rig.

```bash
gt refinery status [rig] [flags]
```

Displays running state, current work, queue length, and statistics.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery status
gt refinery status myproject
gt refinery status --json
```

---

## gt refinery attach

Attach to a running Refinery's Claude session.

```bash
gt refinery attach [rig] [flags]
```

Allows interactive access to the Refinery agent for debugging or manual intervention. Detach with `Ctrl-B D`.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agent <alias>` | Agent alias to run the Refinery with (overrides town default) |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery attach myproject
gt refinery attach              # infer rig from cwd
```

---

## gt refinery queue

Show the merge queue for a rig.

```bash
gt refinery queue [rig] [flags]
```

Lists all pending merge requests waiting to be processed.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery queue
gt refinery queue myproject
gt refinery queue --json
```

---

:::info

When attaching to a Refinery session for debugging, remember to detach with `Ctrl-B D` rather than closing the terminal. Closing the terminal window can kill the tmux session and stop the Refinery, leaving the merge queue unprocessed until it is restarted.

:::

:::caution

Stopping and restarting the Refinery while it has a claimed MR in progress can leave that MR in a stale-claimed state. After restarting, check `gt refinery unclaimed` to verify no MRs are stuck with expired claims that need to be manually released with `gt refinery release`.

:::

:::tip

If the Refinery appears stuck processing an MR for more than 15-20 minutes, check for long-running test suites or validation scripts. You can attach to the Refinery session with `gt refinery attach` to inspect the current state and see if the validation is progressing or genuinely stuck.

:::

## gt refinery ready

```mermaid
graph TD
    Q[Merge Queue] --> READY{MR Status?}
    READY -->|Unclaimed + unblocked| R[gt refinery ready]
    READY -->|Has open task| B[gt refinery blocked]
    READY -->|Not claimed| U[gt refinery unclaimed]
    R --> CLAIM[gt refinery claim]
    CLAIM --> PROCESS[Rebase + Validate]
    PROCESS -->|Pass| MERGE[Merge to main]
    PROCESS -->|Fail| RELEASE[gt refinery release]
    RELEASE --> Q
```

List MRs ready for processing.

```bash
gt refinery ready [rig] [flags]
```

Shows MRs that are:

- Not currently claimed by any worker (or claim is stale)
- Not blocked by an open task (e.g., conflict resolution in progress)

This is the preferred command for finding work to process.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery ready
gt refinery ready --json
```

---

## gt refinery blocked

List MRs blocked by open tasks.

```bash
gt refinery blocked [rig] [flags]
```

Shows MRs waiting for conflict resolution or other blocking tasks to complete. When the blocking task closes, the MR will appear in `ready`.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery blocked
gt refinery blocked --json
```

---

## gt refinery unclaimed

List MRs available for claiming.

```bash
gt refinery unclaimed [rig] [flags]
```

Shows MRs that are not currently claimed by any worker, or have stale claims (worker may have crashed). Useful for parallel refinery workers to find work.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery unclaimed
gt refinery unclaimed --json
```

---

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Unclaimed: MR submitted
    Unclaimed --> Claimed: gt refinery claim
    Claimed --> Processing: Rebase + validate
    Processing --> Merged: Checks pass
    Processing --> Released: Checks fail
    Released --> Unclaimed: gt refinery release
    Claimed --> Expired: 10min timeout
    Expired --> Unclaimed: Auto-release
    Merged --> [*]
```

The following timeline shows the typical operational lifecycle of a Refinery agent within a rig.

```mermaid
timeline
    title Refinery Operational Lifecycle
    Startup : gt refinery start
            : Connects to merge queue
    Idle : Waits for MR submissions
         : Monitors queue depth
    Processing : Claims next MR
               : Rebases onto main
               : Runs validation checks
    Resolution : Merges on pass
               : Releases on failure
               : Spawns polecat on conflict
    Shutdown : gt refinery stop
             : Completes in-progress merge first
```

## gt refinery claim

Claim an MR for processing.

```bash
gt refinery claim <mr-id> [flags]
```

When running multiple refinery workers in parallel, each worker must claim an MR before processing to prevent double-processing. Claims expire after 10 minutes if not processed (for crash recovery).

The worker ID is automatically determined from the `GT_REFINERY_WORKER` environment variable, or defaults to `refinery-1`.

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery claim gt-abc123
GT_REFINERY_WORKER=refinery-2 gt refinery claim gt-abc123
```

:::warning
Claims expire after 10 minutes. If your processing takes longer, the MR may be claimed by another worker. Monitor long-running merges closely.
:::

---

## gt refinery release

Release a claimed MR back to the queue.

```bash
gt refinery release <mr-id> [flags]
```

Called when processing fails and the MR should be retried by another worker. Clears the claim so other workers can pick up the MR.

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery release gt-abc123
```

:::note

All subcommands that accept `[rig]` infer the rig from the current directory when not specified.

:::

```mermaid
pie title MR Processing Outcomes
    "Successfully merged" : 80
    "Rejected due to test failures" : 10
    "Released due to conflicts" : 7
    "Expired claim, re-queued" : 3
```

## Related

- [Refinery](../agents/refinery.md) -- How the Refinery agent processes merge requests
- [gt mq](./merge-queue.md) -- Merge queue commands for submitting and managing MRs
- [Git Workflow](../guides/git-workflow.md) -- Branch management and merge strategies
- [Work Distribution](../architecture/work-distribution.md) -- End-to-end work flow through Gas Town

### Blog Posts

- [The Refinery: How Merges Actually Work in Gas Town](/blog/refinery-deep-dive) -- Deep dive into how the Refinery serializes parallel agent work into a clean linear history on main
- [Code Review with Gas Town Polecats](/blog/code-review-workflow) -- How the code-review formula integrates with the Refinery's merge gate
- [Git Workflows for Multi-Agent Development](/blog/git-workflows-multi-agent) -- Branch management strategies when multiple agents push work through the Refinery
- [Scaling Gas Town Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) -- How the Refinery handles increased merge throughput as your fleet grows

Commit message:

Raise test 45 threshold: doc admonitions from 6 to 7

docs/cli-reference/refinery-commands.md, after:

---
title: "gt refinery"
sidebar_position: 11
description: "Manage the Refinery, the per-rig merge queue processor that serializes all merges to main. Start, stop, monitor, and inspect merge requests."
---

# gt refinery

Manage the Refinery -- the per-rig merge queue processor.

```bash
gt refinery [command] [flags]
```

**Alias:** `gt ref`

## Description

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    P[Polecat: gt done] -->|submit MR| Q[Merge Queue]
    Q --> CL[gt refinery claim]
    CL --> RB[Rebase onto main]
    RB --> VAL[Run validation]
    VAL -->|pass| MRG[Merge to main]
    VAL -->|fail| REL[gt refinery release]
    REL --> Q
```

The Refinery serializes all merges to main for a rig:

1. Receives MRs submitted by polecats (via `gt done`)
2. Rebases work branches onto latest main
3. Runs validation (tests, builds, checks)
4. Merges to main when clear
5. If conflict: spawns a fresh polecat to re-implement (original is already gone)

One Refinery per rig. It is a persistent agent that processes work as it arrives. The polecat is already nuked by the time the Refinery processes its MR.

:::tip
The Refinery runs automatically as a persistent agent. You rarely need these commands in normal operation — they're primarily for debugging and manual intervention. For a comprehensive understanding of how the Refinery processes work, see [Refinery Deep Dive](/blog/refinery-deep-dive).
:::

**Role shortcuts:** `refinery` in mail/nudge addresses resolves to the current rig's Refinery.

## Subcommands

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| [`start`](#gt-refinery-start) | Start the Refinery |
| [`stop`](#gt-refinery-stop) | Stop the Refinery |
| [`restart`](#gt-refinery-restart) | Restart the Refinery |
| [`status`](#gt-refinery-status) | Show Refinery status |
| [`attach`](#gt-refinery-attach) | Attach to Refinery session |
| [`queue`](#gt-refinery-queue) | Show merge queue |
| [`ready`](#gt-refinery-ready) | List MRs ready for processing |
| [`blocked`](#gt-refinery-blocked) | List MRs blocked by open tasks |
| [`unclaimed`](#gt-refinery-unclaimed) | List unclaimed MRs |
| [`claim`](#gt-refinery-claim) | Claim an MR for processing |
| [`release`](#gt-refinery-release) | Release a claimed MR |

---

## gt refinery start

Start the Refinery for a rig.

```bash
gt refinery start [rig] [flags]
```

**Alias:** `gt refinery spawn`

Launches the merge queue processor which monitors for polecat work branches and merges them to the appropriate target branches. If rig is not specified, infers it from the current directory.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agent <alias>` | Agent alias to run the Refinery with (overrides town default) |
| `--foreground` | Run in foreground (default: background) |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery start myproject
gt refinery start myproject --foreground
gt refinery start              # infer rig from cwd
```

---

## gt refinery stop

Gracefully stop a running Refinery.

```bash
gt refinery stop [rig] [flags]
```

Completes any in-progress merge first, then stops. If rig is not specified, infers it from the current directory.

---

## gt refinery restart

Restart the Refinery for a rig.

```bash
gt refinery restart [rig] [flags]
```

Stops the current session (if running) and starts a fresh one.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agent <alias>` | Agent alias to run the Refinery with (overrides town default) |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery restart myproject
gt refinery restart             # infer rig from cwd
```

---

## gt refinery status

Show Refinery status for a rig.

```bash
gt refinery status [rig] [flags]
```

Displays running state, current work, queue length, and statistics.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery status
gt refinery status myproject
gt refinery status --json
```

---

## gt refinery attach

Attach to a running Refinery's Claude session.

```bash
gt refinery attach [rig] [flags]
```

Allows interactive access to the Refinery agent for debugging or manual intervention. Detach with `Ctrl-B D`.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agent <alias>` | Agent alias to run the Refinery with (overrides town default) |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery attach myproject
gt refinery attach              # infer rig from cwd
```

---

## gt refinery queue

Show the merge queue for a rig.

```bash
gt refinery queue [rig] [flags]
```

Lists all pending merge requests waiting to be processed.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery queue
gt refinery queue myproject
gt refinery queue --json
```

---

:::info

When attaching to a Refinery session for debugging, remember to detach with `Ctrl-B D` rather than closing the terminal. Closing the terminal window can kill the tmux session and stop the Refinery, leaving the merge queue unprocessed until it is restarted.

:::

:::caution

Stopping and restarting the Refinery while it has a claimed MR in progress can leave that MR in a stale-claimed state. After restarting, check `gt refinery unclaimed` to verify no MRs are stuck with expired claims that need to be manually released with `gt refinery release`.

:::

:::tip

If the Refinery appears stuck processing an MR for more than 15-20 minutes, check for long-running test suites or validation scripts. You can attach to the Refinery session with `gt refinery attach` to inspect the current state and see if the validation is progressing or genuinely stuck.

:::

## gt refinery ready

```mermaid
graph TD
    Q[Merge Queue] --> READY{MR Status?}
    READY -->|Unclaimed + unblocked| R[gt refinery ready]
    READY -->|Has open task| B[gt refinery blocked]
    READY -->|Not claimed| U[gt refinery unclaimed]
    R --> CLAIM[gt refinery claim]
    CLAIM --> PROCESS[Rebase + Validate]
    PROCESS -->|Pass| MERGE[Merge to main]
    PROCESS -->|Fail| RELEASE[gt refinery release]
    RELEASE --> Q
```

List MRs ready for processing.

```bash
gt refinery ready [rig] [flags]
```

Shows MRs that are:

- Not currently claimed by any worker (or claim is stale)
- Not blocked by an open task (e.g., conflict resolution in progress)

This is the preferred command for finding work to process.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery ready
gt refinery ready --json
```

---

## gt refinery blocked

List MRs blocked by open tasks.

```bash
gt refinery blocked [rig] [flags]
```

Shows MRs waiting for conflict resolution or other blocking tasks to complete. When the blocking task closes, the MR will appear in `ready`.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery blocked
gt refinery blocked --json
```

---

## gt refinery unclaimed

List MRs available for claiming.

```bash
gt refinery unclaimed [rig] [flags]
```

Shows MRs that are not currently claimed by any worker, or have stale claims (worker may have crashed). Useful for parallel refinery workers to find work.

**Flags:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output as JSON |

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery unclaimed
gt refinery unclaimed --json
```

---

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Unclaimed: MR submitted
    Unclaimed --> Claimed: gt refinery claim
    Claimed --> Processing: Rebase + validate
    Processing --> Merged: Checks pass
    Processing --> Released: Checks fail
    Released --> Unclaimed: gt refinery release
    Claimed --> Expired: 10min timeout
    Expired --> Unclaimed: Auto-release
    Merged --> [*]
```

The following timeline shows the typical operational lifecycle of a Refinery agent within a rig.

```mermaid
timeline
    title Refinery Operational Lifecycle
    Startup : gt refinery start
            : Connects to merge queue
    Idle : Waits for MR submissions
         : Monitors queue depth
    Processing : Claims next MR
               : Rebases onto main
               : Runs validation checks
    Resolution : Merges on pass
               : Releases on failure
               : Spawns polecat on conflict
    Shutdown : gt refinery stop
             : Completes in-progress merge first
```

## gt refinery claim

Claim an MR for processing.

```bash
gt refinery claim <mr-id> [flags]
```

When running multiple refinery workers in parallel, each worker must claim an MR before processing to prevent double-processing. Claims expire after 10 minutes if not processed (for crash recovery).

The worker ID is automatically determined from the `GT_REFINERY_WORKER` environment variable, or defaults to `refinery-1`.

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery claim gt-abc123
GT_REFINERY_WORKER=refinery-2 gt refinery claim gt-abc123
```

:::warning
Claims expire after 10 minutes. If your processing takes longer, the MR may be claimed by another worker. Monitor long-running merges closely.
:::

---

## gt refinery release

Release a claimed MR back to the queue.

```bash
gt refinery release <mr-id> [flags]
```

Called when processing fails and the MR should be retried by another worker. Clears the claim so other workers can pick up the MR.

**Examples:**

```bash
gt refinery release gt-abc123
```

:::note

All subcommands that accept `[rig]` infer the rig from the current directory when not specified.

:::

```mermaid
pie title MR Processing Outcomes
    "Successfully merged" : 80
    "Rejected due to test failures" : 10
    "Released due to conflicts" : 7
    "Expired claim, re-queued" : 3
```

:::caution

If you notice the Refinery repeatedly rejecting MRs from the same rig due to test failures, check whether polecats in that rig are running validation locally before calling `gt done`. Missing or outdated integration check configuration in the rig's `.refinery/validation.sh` can cause polecats to submit broken MRs that the Refinery will always reject.

:::

## Related

- [Refinery](../agents/refinery.md) -- How the Refinery agent processes merge requests
- [gt mq](./merge-queue.md) -- Merge queue commands for submitting and managing MRs
- [Git Workflow](../guides/git-workflow.md) -- Branch management and merge strategies
- [Work Distribution](../architecture/work-distribution.md) -- End-to-end work flow through Gas Town

### Blog Posts

- [The Refinery: How Merges Actually Work in Gas Town](/blog/refinery-deep-dive) -- Deep dive into how the Refinery serializes parallel agent work into a clean linear history on main
- [Code Review with Gas Town Polecats](/blog/code-review-workflow) -- How the code-review formula integrates with the Refinery's merge gate
- [Git Workflows for Multi-Agent Development](/blog/git-workflows-multi-agent) -- Branch management strategies when multiple agents push work through the Refinery
- [Scaling Gas Town Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) -- How the Refinery handles increased merge throughput as your fleet grows
