docs/cli-reference/rigs.md, before:

---
title: "Rig Management"
sidebar_position: 7
description: "CLI reference for adding, starting, stopping, parking, docking, and configuring rig project containers."
---

# Rig Management

Commands for adding, configuring, starting, stopping, and managing rigs. A rig is a project container that wraps a git repository with the full Gas Town agent infrastructure.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Added: gt rig add
    Added --> Active: gt rig start
    Active --> Stopped: gt rig stop
    Active --> Parked: gt rig park
    Active --> Docked: gt rig dock
    Stopped --> Active: gt rig start
    Parked --> Active: gt rig unpark
    Docked --> Active: gt rig undock
    Active --> Reset: gt rig reset
    Reset --> Active: gt rig boot
    Active --> Active: gt rig reboot
```

---

## `gt rig list`

List all rigs in the town.

```bash
gt rig list [options]
```

**Description:** Shows all rigs with their current status, agent counts, and activity summary.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--status <status>` | Filter: `active`, `parked`, `docked`, `stopped` |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--verbose` | Show extended details |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig list
gt rig list --status active
```

**Sample output:**

```text
RIG          STATUS    POLECATS   QUEUE   OPEN BEADS   BRANCH
myproject    active    3          2       7            main
docs         active    1          0       2            main
backend      parked    0          0       4            main
```

---

## `gt rig add`

Add a new rig to the town.

```bash
gt rig add <name> <git-url> [options]
```

**Description:** Clones the repository, creates the rig directory structure, initializes beads, and sets up agent workspaces (witness, refinery, mayor, polecats).

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--branch <name>` | Check out a specific branch (default: `main`) |
| `--agent <runtime>` | Default agent runtime for this rig |
| `--no-start` | Add the rig but do not start its agents |
| `--shallow` | Shallow clone for large repositories |

**Example:**

```bash
# Add a rig
gt rig add myproject https://github.com/you/repo.git

# Add with SSH URL and specific branch
gt rig add backend git@github.com:you/backend.git --branch develop

# Add without starting agents
gt rig add docs https://github.com/you/docs.git --no-start
```

**Created structure:**

```text
~/gt/myproject/
├── .beads/          # Rig-level issue tracking
├── config.json      # Rig configuration
├── refinery/rig/    # Canonical main clone
├── mayor/rig/       # Mayor's working copy
├── crew/            # Human developer workspaces
├── witness/         # Health monitor state
├── polecats/        # Ephemeral worker directories
└── plugins/         # Rig-level plugins
```

---

## `gt rig start`

Start all agents for a rig.

```bash
gt rig start <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Starts the Witness and Refinery agents for the specified rig. If polecats have hooked work, they will also be spawned.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agents <list>` | Start only specific agents (comma-separated) |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig start myproject
gt rig start myproject --agents witness,refinery
```

---

## `gt rig stop`

Stop all agents for a rig.

```bash
gt rig stop <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Gracefully stops all agents running in the rig, including the Witness, Refinery, and any active polecats.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Force stop without graceful shutdown |
| `--keep-polecats` | Do not stop running polecats |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig stop myproject
gt rig stop myproject --force
```

:::warning

Stopping a rig with active polecats may result in lost uncommitted work. Use `--keep-polecats` or ensure polecats have committed their changes first.

:::

---

## `gt rig shutdown`

Fully shut down a rig including cleanup.

```bash
gt rig shutdown <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Stops all agents, cleans up polecat worktrees, drains the merge queue, and puts the rig in a stopped state. More thorough than `gt rig stop`.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Skip confirmation and force shutdown |
| `--drain` | Wait for merge queue to empty before shutting down |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig shutdown myproject
gt rig shutdown myproject --drain
```

---

## `gt rig status`

Show detailed status for a rig.

```bash
gt rig status <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Displays comprehensive rig information including agent status, polecat activity, merge queue depth, open beads, and resource usage.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--verbose` | Show extended details |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig status myproject
```

**Sample output:**

```text
Rig: myproject
Repository: https://github.com/you/repo.git
Branch: main
Status: active

Agents:
  Witness:  running (PID 1240)
  Refinery: running (PID 1250)

Polecats: 3 running
  toast    running   gt-abc12   fix/login-bug          15m
  alpha    running   gt-def34   feat/email-validation   10m
  bravo    running   gt-ghi56   refactor/auth-module    5m

Merge Queue: 2 pending, 1 processing
Open Beads: 7
Active Convoy: hq-cv-001 (2/3)
```

---

## `gt rig reset`

Reset a rig to a clean state.

```bash
gt rig reset <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Resets the rig by stopping all agents, removing all polecat worktrees, clearing the merge queue, and optionally resetting the beads database.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--hard` | Also reset beads database and agent state |
| `--force` | Skip confirmation |
| `--keep-crew` | Preserve crew workspaces |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig reset myproject
gt rig reset myproject --hard --force
```

:::danger

`gt rig reset --hard` destroys all work state including beads, hooks, and merge queue items. This cannot be undone.

:::

---

## `gt rig boot`

Boot a rig from cold state.

```bash
gt rig boot <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Initializes a rig that has been shut down or is in a cold state. Sets up worktrees, starts agents, and processes any pending hooks.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--full` | Full boot including all optional agents |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig boot myproject
gt rig boot myproject --full
```

---

## `gt rig reboot`

Reboot a running rig.

```bash
gt rig reboot <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Performs a stop-then-start cycle for the rig. Agents are stopped gracefully, state is preserved, and agents are restarted.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Force reboot without waiting for graceful shutdown |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig reboot myproject
```

---

## `gt rig park`

Park a rig (suspend without removing).

```bash
gt rig park <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Stops all agents and marks the rig as parked. Parked rigs consume no resources but retain all configuration and state. Work can be resumed later with `gt rig unpark`.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--reason <text>` | Reason for parking |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig park backend --reason "Waiting for API spec finalization"
```

---

## `gt rig unpark`

Resume a parked rig.

```bash
gt rig unpark <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Restarts agents and resumes work in a previously parked rig.

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig unpark backend
```

---

## `gt rig dock`

Dock a rig (deep storage mode).

```bash
gt rig dock <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Places a rig in deep storage. Docking is more aggressive than parking: it cleans up worktrees, removes polecat directories, and minimizes disk usage while preserving configuration and beads history.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Skip confirmation |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig dock backend
```

---

## `gt rig undock`

Restore a docked rig.

```bash
gt rig undock <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Restores a docked rig by recreating worktrees, agent directories, and starting agents.

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig undock backend
```

---

## `gt rig config`

View or modify rig configuration.

```bash
gt rig config <name> [key] [value] [options]
```

**Description:** Without a key, shows all configuration for the rig. With a key, shows that specific setting. With a key and value, sets the configuration.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--reset` | Reset configuration to defaults |

**Common configuration keys:**

| Key | Description | Default |
|-----|-------------|---------|
| `agent` | Default agent runtime | `claude` |
| `max_polecats` | Maximum concurrent polecats | `5` |
| `merge_strategy` | Merge strategy: `rebase`, `merge`, `squash` | `rebase` |
| `auto_witness` | Auto-start witness on rig start | `true` |
| `auto_refinery` | Auto-start refinery on rig start | `true` |
| `branch` | Main branch name | `main` |

**Example:**

```bash
# Show all config
gt rig config myproject

# Get a specific setting
gt rig config myproject max_polecats

# Set a value
gt rig config myproject max_polecats 8

# Reset to defaults
gt rig config myproject --reset
```

---

## `gt rig settings`

Manage advanced rig settings.

```bash
gt rig settings <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Access and modify advanced rig settings that are not part of the standard configuration. Includes validation rules, plugin settings, and integration configuration.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--show` | Display all settings |
| `--set <key=value>` | Set a setting |
| `--unset <key>` | Remove a setting |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

**Example:**

```bash
# Show all settings
gt rig settings myproject --show

# Set a custom setting
gt rig settings myproject --set "validation.timeout=300"

# Remove a setting
gt rig settings myproject --unset "validation.timeout"
```

## Related

- [Rigs Concept](../concepts/rigs.md) -- What rigs are and how they work
- [Starting & Stopping](../operations/lifecycle.md) -- Rig lifecycle management
- [Workspace Management](./workspace.md) -- Town-level workspace commands

### Blog Posts

- [Scaling Gas Town Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) -- Architectural patterns and operational strategies for running Gas Town at scale with dozens of concurrent agents
- [Why Git Worktrees? Gas Town's Isolation Strategy](/blog/git-worktrees) -- How Gas Town uses git worktrees instead of containers to isolate parallel agent workspaces

Commit message:

Add blog post: Understanding Rigs with cross-links

docs/cli-reference/rigs.md, after:

---
title: "Rig Management"
sidebar_position: 7
description: "CLI reference for adding, starting, stopping, parking, docking, and configuring rig project containers."
---

# Rig Management

Commands for adding, configuring, starting, stopping, and managing rigs. A rig is a project container that wraps a git repository with the full Gas Town agent infrastructure.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Added: gt rig add
    Added --> Active: gt rig start
    Active --> Stopped: gt rig stop
    Active --> Parked: gt rig park
    Active --> Docked: gt rig dock
    Stopped --> Active: gt rig start
    Parked --> Active: gt rig unpark
    Docked --> Active: gt rig undock
    Active --> Reset: gt rig reset
    Reset --> Active: gt rig boot
    Active --> Active: gt rig reboot
```

---

## `gt rig list`

List all rigs in the town.

```bash
gt rig list [options]
```

**Description:** Shows all rigs with their current status, agent counts, and activity summary.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--status <status>` | Filter: `active`, `parked`, `docked`, `stopped` |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--verbose` | Show extended details |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig list
gt rig list --status active
```

**Sample output:**

```text
RIG          STATUS    POLECATS   QUEUE   OPEN BEADS   BRANCH
myproject    active    3          2       7            main
docs         active    1          0       2            main
backend      parked    0          0       4            main
```

---

## `gt rig add`

Add a new rig to the town.

```bash
gt rig add <name> <git-url> [options]
```

**Description:** Clones the repository, creates the rig directory structure, initializes beads, and sets up agent workspaces (witness, refinery, mayor, polecats).

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--branch <name>` | Check out a specific branch (default: `main`) |
| `--agent <runtime>` | Default agent runtime for this rig |
| `--no-start` | Add the rig but do not start its agents |
| `--shallow` | Shallow clone for large repositories |

**Example:**

```bash
# Add a rig
gt rig add myproject https://github.com/you/repo.git

# Add with SSH URL and specific branch
gt rig add backend git@github.com:you/backend.git --branch develop

# Add without starting agents
gt rig add docs https://github.com/you/docs.git --no-start
```

**Created structure:**

```text
~/gt/myproject/
├── .beads/          # Rig-level issue tracking
├── config.json      # Rig configuration
├── refinery/rig/    # Canonical main clone
├── mayor/rig/       # Mayor's working copy
├── crew/            # Human developer workspaces
├── witness/         # Health monitor state
├── polecats/        # Ephemeral worker directories
└── plugins/         # Rig-level plugins
```

---

## `gt rig start`

Start all agents for a rig.

```bash
gt rig start <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Starts the Witness and Refinery agents for the specified rig. If polecats have hooked work, they will also be spawned.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agents <list>` | Start only specific agents (comma-separated) |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig start myproject
gt rig start myproject --agents witness,refinery
```

---

## `gt rig stop`

Stop all agents for a rig.

```bash
gt rig stop <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Gracefully stops all agents running in the rig, including the Witness, Refinery, and any active polecats.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Force stop without graceful shutdown |
| `--keep-polecats` | Do not stop running polecats |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig stop myproject
gt rig stop myproject --force
```

:::warning

Stopping a rig with active polecats may result in lost uncommitted work. Use `--keep-polecats` or ensure polecats have committed their changes first.

:::

---

## `gt rig shutdown`

Fully shut down a rig including cleanup.

```bash
gt rig shutdown <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Stops all agents, cleans up polecat worktrees, drains the merge queue, and puts the rig in a stopped state. More thorough than `gt rig stop`.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Skip confirmation and force shutdown |
| `--drain` | Wait for merge queue to empty before shutting down |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig shutdown myproject
gt rig shutdown myproject --drain
```

---

## `gt rig status`

Show detailed status for a rig.

```bash
gt rig status <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Displays comprehensive rig information including agent status, polecat activity, merge queue depth, open beads, and resource usage.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--verbose` | Show extended details |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig status myproject
```

**Sample output:**

```text
Rig: myproject
Repository: https://github.com/you/repo.git
Branch: main
Status: active

Agents:
  Witness:  running (PID 1240)
  Refinery: running (PID 1250)

Polecats: 3 running
  toast    running   gt-abc12   fix/login-bug          15m
  alpha    running   gt-def34   feat/email-validation   10m
  bravo    running   gt-ghi56   refactor/auth-module    5m

Merge Queue: 2 pending, 1 processing
Open Beads: 7
Active Convoy: hq-cv-001 (2/3)
```

---

## `gt rig reset`

Reset a rig to a clean state.

```bash
gt rig reset <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Resets the rig by stopping all agents, removing all polecat worktrees, clearing the merge queue, and optionally resetting the beads database.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--hard` | Also reset beads database and agent state |
| `--force` | Skip confirmation |
| `--keep-crew` | Preserve crew workspaces |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig reset myproject
gt rig reset myproject --hard --force
```

:::danger

`gt rig reset --hard` destroys all work state including beads, hooks, and merge queue items. This cannot be undone.

:::

---

## `gt rig boot`

Boot a rig from cold state.

```bash
gt rig boot <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Initializes a rig that has been shut down or is in a cold state. Sets up worktrees, starts agents, and processes any pending hooks.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--full` | Full boot including all optional agents |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig boot myproject
gt rig boot myproject --full
```

---

## `gt rig reboot`

Reboot a running rig.

```bash
gt rig reboot <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Performs a stop-then-start cycle for the rig. Agents are stopped gracefully, state is preserved, and agents are restarted.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Force reboot without waiting for graceful shutdown |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig reboot myproject
```

---

## `gt rig park`

Park a rig (suspend without removing).

```bash
gt rig park <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Stops all agents and marks the rig as parked. Parked rigs consume no resources but retain all configuration and state. Work can be resumed later with `gt rig unpark`.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--reason <text>` | Reason for parking |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig park backend --reason "Waiting for API spec finalization"
```

---

## `gt rig unpark`

Resume a parked rig.

```bash
gt rig unpark <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Restarts agents and resumes work in a previously parked rig.

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig unpark backend
```

---

## `gt rig dock`

Dock a rig (deep storage mode).

```bash
gt rig dock <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Places a rig in deep storage. Docking is more aggressive than parking: it cleans up worktrees, removes polecat directories, and minimizes disk usage while preserving configuration and beads history.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Skip confirmation |

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig dock backend
```

---

## `gt rig undock`

Restore a docked rig.

```bash
gt rig undock <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Restores a docked rig by recreating worktrees, agent directories, and starting agents.

**Example:**

```bash
gt rig undock backend
```

---

## `gt rig config`

View or modify rig configuration.

```bash
gt rig config <name> [key] [value] [options]
```

**Description:** Without a key, shows all configuration for the rig. With a key, shows that specific setting. With a key and value, sets the configuration.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--reset` | Reset configuration to defaults |

**Common configuration keys:**

| Key | Description | Default |
|-----|-------------|---------|
| `agent` | Default agent runtime | `claude` |
| `max_polecats` | Maximum concurrent polecats | `5` |
| `merge_strategy` | Merge strategy: `rebase`, `merge`, `squash` | `rebase` |
| `auto_witness` | Auto-start witness on rig start | `true` |
| `auto_refinery` | Auto-start refinery on rig start | `true` |
| `branch` | Main branch name | `main` |

**Example:**

```bash
# Show all config
gt rig config myproject

# Get a specific setting
gt rig config myproject max_polecats

# Set a value
gt rig config myproject max_polecats 8

# Reset to defaults
gt rig config myproject --reset
```

---

## `gt rig settings`

Manage advanced rig settings.

```bash
gt rig settings <name> [options]
```

**Description:** Access and modify advanced rig settings that are not part of the standard configuration. Includes validation rules, plugin settings, and integration configuration.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--show` | Display all settings |
| `--set <key=value>` | Set a setting |
| `--unset <key>` | Remove a setting |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

**Example:**

```bash
# Show all settings
gt rig settings myproject --show

# Set a custom setting
gt rig settings myproject --set "validation.timeout=300"

# Remove a setting
gt rig settings myproject --unset "validation.timeout"
```

## Related

- [Rigs Concept](../concepts/rigs.md) -- What rigs are and how they work
- [Starting & Stopping](../operations/lifecycle.md) -- Rig lifecycle management
- [Workspace Management](./workspace.md) -- Town-level workspace commands

### Blog Posts

- [Understanding Rigs: Gas Town's Project Containers](/blog/understanding-rigs) -- When to create, park, or dock rigs and how they encapsulate projects
- [Scaling Gas Town Beyond 30 Agents](/blog/scaling-beyond-30) -- Architectural patterns and operational strategies for running Gas Town at scale with dozens of concurrent agents
- [Why Git Worktrees? Gas Town's Isolation Strategy](/blog/git-worktrees) -- How Gas Town uses git worktrees instead of containers to isolate parallel agent workspaces
