docs/cli-reference/work.md, before:

---
title: "Work Management"
sidebar_position: 3
description: "Reference for gt sling, gt hook, gt done, and bd commands that create, assign, track, and complete work items."
---

# Work Management

Commands for creating, assigning, tracking, and completing work items. This includes both `gt` commands for work orchestration and `bd` (Beads) commands for issue tracking.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Open: bd create
    Open --> Hooked: gt sling / gt hook
    Hooked --> InProgress: Agent starts work
    InProgress --> Completed: gt done
    InProgress --> Escalated: gt done --escalate
    InProgress --> Deferred: gt done --defer
    InProgress --> Open: gt release / gt unsling
    Completed --> [*]: Merged to main
    Escalated --> Open: Resolved, re-assigned
```

---

## Work Orchestration

### `gt ready`

List work items that are ready for assignment.

```bash
gt ready [options]
```

**Description:** Shows beads in `pending` or `open` status that are not currently assigned to any agent. These are available for slinging to workers.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--rig <name>` | Filter to a specific rig |
| `--priority <level>` | Filter by priority: `critical`, `high`, `medium`, `low` |
| `--type <type>` | Filter by type: `bug`, `feature`, `task`, `chore` |
| `--convoy <id>` | Show only items in a specific convoy |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

**Example:**

```bash
# Show all ready work
gt ready

# Show high-priority bugs ready for work
gt ready --priority high --type bug

# Show ready work for a specific rig
gt ready --rig myproject
```

**Sample output:**

```text
ID         PRIORITY   TYPE      TITLE                           RIG
gt-abc12   high       bug       Fix login redirect loop         myproject
gt-def34   medium     feature   Add email validation            myproject
gt-ghi56   low        task      Update API documentation        docs
```

---

### `gt sling`

Assign work to a rig or agent.

```bash
gt sling <bead-id>... <target> [options]
```

**Description:** The primary command for assigning work. Hooks the bead to the target, updates its status, and spawns a polecat to execute the work. This is the central work distribution command in Gas Town.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agent <runtime>` | Agent runtime for the spawned polecat |
| `--name <name>` | Name for the spawned polecat |
| `--priority` | Override bead priority for scheduling |
| `--no-spawn` | Hook the work but do not spawn a polecat |

**Example:**

```bash
# Assign a single bead to a rig (auto-spawns polecat)
gt sling gt-abc12 myproject

# Assign multiple beads
gt sling gt-abc12 gt-def34 myproject

# Assign with a specific agent
gt sling gt-abc12 myproject --agent cursor

# Hook work without spawning (manual pickup later)
gt sling gt-abc12 myproject --no-spawn
```

**What happens:**

1. Bead status changes to `hooked`
2. Work attaches to the target's hook
3. A polecat spawns in the rig (unless `--no-spawn`)
4. The polecat's startup hook finds and begins the work

:::tip

The Mayor typically handles slinging automatically. Use `gt sling` for manual assignment or when fine-grained control is needed. For understanding the full workflow from Mayor to merged code, see [Mayor Workflow](/blog/mayor-workflow).

:::

---

### `gt hook`

View or attach work to the current agent's hook.

```bash
gt hook [bead-id] [options]
```

**Description:** Without arguments, shows what is currently on the agent's hook. With a bead ID, attaches that work item to the hook. The hook is Gas Town's durability primitive -- work on a hook survives session restarts, compaction, and crashes.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

**Example:**

```bash
# Show current hook
gt hook

# Attach work to hook
gt hook gt-abc12
```

**Sample output:**

```text
Hook: gt-abc12 "Fix login redirect loop" [in_progress]
  Rig: myproject
  Branch: fix/login-bug
  Convoy: hq-cv-001
  Hooked: 15m ago
```

---

### `gt unsling`

Remove work from a hook without completing it.

```bash
gt unsling <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Detaches work from an agent's hook and sets the bead back to an assignable state. Use this when work needs to be reassigned or when a polecat should not continue with a task.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--release` | Also release the bead back to `open` status |
| `--force` | Force unsling even if the agent is actively working |

**Example:**

```bash
# Unsling from current agent
gt unsling gt-abc12

# Unsling and release back to ready pool
gt unsling gt-abc12 --release
```

---

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    DONE[gt done] --> COMMIT[Commit remaining changes]
    COMMIT --> PUSH[Push branch]
    PUSH --> MR[Create merge request]
    MR --> STATUS[Update bead status → completed]
    STATUS --> EXIT[Exit polecat session]
    MR --> REF[Refinery picks up MR]
    REF --> REVIEW[Automated review + merge to main]
```

### `gt done`

Mark work as complete and submit a merge request.

```bash
gt done [options]
```

**Description:** The standard polecat exit command. Commits any remaining changes, pushes the branch, creates a merge request for the Refinery, updates the bead status, and exits the polecat session. This is the happy-path completion for any piece of work.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--message <msg>` | MR description / completion summary |
| `--no-mr` | Complete without creating a merge request |
| `--escalate` | Exit with escalation instead of completion |
| `--defer` | Exit with deferred status (work paused, not done) |
| `--phase` | Exit with phase-complete status (gate point) |

**Example:**

```bash
# Standard completion
gt done --message "Fixed login redirect by correcting OAuth callback URL"

# Complete without MR (e.g., documentation-only changes)
gt done --no-mr --message "Updated local docs only"

# Escalate a blocker
gt done --escalate --message "Blocked: need API credentials for staging"
```

**Exit states:**

| Flag | Exit State | Meaning |
|------|-----------|---------|
| (default) | `COMPLETED` | Work done, MR submitted to Refinery |
| `--escalate` | `ESCALATED` | Hit a blocker, needs human input |
| `--defer` | `DEFERRED` | Paused, another agent can pick up later |
| `--phase` | `PHASE_COMPLETE` | Phase done, waiting for gate |

---

:::warning

Running `gt done --escalate` marks the bead as escalated and exits the polecat session immediately. Make sure to commit and push all work before escalating, as the polecat will not get another chance to save changes after the escalation exit.

:::

:::tip

When a polecat escalates with `gt done --escalate`, the bead remains hooked to that polecat until explicitly unslung or reassigned. Use `gt unsling --release` to free the bead back to the ready pool after addressing the escalated issue, rather than leaving it indefinitely hooked to a terminated polecat.

:::

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Work Discovery"
        A[gt ready] --> B[Filter by --priority]
        B --> C[Filter by --type]
        C --> D[List of available beads]
    end
    subgraph "Work Assignment"
        D --> E[gt sling bead target]
        E --> F[Bead status: hooked]
        F --> G[Polecat spawned]
    end
    subgraph "Work Completion"
        G --> H[gt done]
        H --> I{Exit state}
        I -->|COMPLETED| J[MR submitted]
        I -->|ESCALATED| K[Needs human input]
        I -->|DEFERRED| L[Paused for later]
    end
```

### `gt close`

Close a bead without going through the done workflow.

```bash
gt close <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Manually closes a bead. Useful for closing duplicate issues, items resolved by other means, or administrative cleanup.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--reason <text>` | Reason for closing |
| `--wontfix` | Close as won't fix |
| `--duplicate <id>` | Close as duplicate of another bead |

**Example:**

```bash
gt close gt-abc12 --reason "Resolved by upstream fix"
gt close gt-def34 --duplicate gt-abc12
gt close gt-ghi56 --wontfix
```

---

### `gt release`

Release a stuck in-progress bead back to the ready pool.

```bash
gt release <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Frees a bead that is stuck in `in_progress` or `hooked` status, making it available for reassignment. Essential for recovering from polecat crashes or stalled work.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Release even if an agent appears to still be working on it |

**Example:**

```bash
gt release gt-abc12
gt release gt-abc12 --force
```

:::tip

The Witness automatically detects stalled polecats and can release their work. Use `gt release` for manual intervention.

:::

---

### `gt show`

Show detailed information about a bead or work item.

```bash
gt show <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Displays comprehensive information about a bead including its status, history, assigned agent, convoy membership, and related activity.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--history` | Include full status change history |
| `--comments` | Include all comments |

**Example:**

```bash
gt show gt-abc12
gt show gt-abc12 --history
```

**Sample output:**

```text
Bead: gt-abc12
Title: Fix login redirect loop
Type: bug
Priority: high
Status: in_progress
Rig: myproject
Agent: polecat/toast
Branch: fix/login-bug
Convoy: hq-cv-001
Created: 2h ago
Updated: 15m ago
```

---

### `gt cat`

Output the raw content of a bead or work artifact.

```bash
gt cat <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Prints the raw bead content, including description, comments, and metadata. Useful for piping into other tools or for programmatic access.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--field <name>` | Output only a specific field |
| `--format <fmt>` | Output format: `text`, `json`, `yaml` |

**Example:**

```bash
# Full bead content
gt cat gt-abc12

# Just the description
gt cat gt-abc12 --field description

# JSON output for scripting
gt cat gt-abc12 --format json
```

---

### `gt commit`

Git commit with automatic agent identity.

```bash
gt commit [flags] [-- git-commit-args...]
```

**Description:** A git commit wrapper that automatically sets the git author identity for agents. When run by an agent (with `GT_ROLE` set), it detects the agent identity from environment variables and converts it to a git-friendly name and email. When run by a human (no `GT_ROLE`), it passes through to plain `git commit`.

**Example:**

```bash
# Commit as current agent
gt commit -m "Fix bug"

# Stage all and commit
gt commit -am "Quick fix"

# Amend last commit
gt commit -- --amend
```

**Identity mapping:**

```text
Agent: gastown/crew/jack  →  Name: gastown/crew/jack
                              Email: gastown.crew.jack@gastown.local
```

:::tip

The email domain is configurable in town settings (`agent_email_domain`). Default: `gastown.local`.

:::

---

```mermaid
graph LR
    CREATE[bd create] --> READY[gt ready]
    READY --> SLING[gt sling bead rig]
    SLING --> HOOK[Bead on hook]
    HOOK --> WORK[Agent works]
    WORK --> DONE[gt done]
    DONE --> MR[Merge request]
    MR --> MERGE[Refinery merges]
    MERGE --> CLOSE[Bead closed]
```

### `gt gate`

Gate coordination for async workflows.

```bash
gt gate <subcommand>
```

**Description:** Gates provide async coordination points in workflows. Most gate operations are in the `bd` CLI (`bd gate create`, `bd gate show`, `bd gate list`, `bd gate close`, `bd gate approve`, `bd gate eval`). The `gt gate` command adds Gas Town integration.

**Subcommands:**

| Subcommand | Description |
|------------|-------------|
| `gt gate wake` | Send wake mail to gate waiters after a gate closes |

**Example:**

```bash
gt gate wake <gate-id>
```

---

## Beads (Issue Tracking)

Beads is the git-backed issue tracking system integrated into Gas Town. The `bd` CLI manages beads directly.

### `bd create`

Create a new bead (issue).

```bash
bd create [options]
```

**Description:** Creates a new bead in the beads database. Beads are the fundamental work unit in Gas Town.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--title <text>` | Bead title (required) |
| `--type <type>` | Type: `bug`, `feature`, `task`, `chore`, `epic` |
| `--priority <level>` | Priority: `critical`, `high`, `medium`, `low` |
| `--description <text>` | Detailed description |
| `--rig <name>` | Assign to a specific rig |
| `--label <label>` | Add labels (can be repeated) |
| `--parent <id>` | Set parent bead for hierarchical tracking |
| `--convoy <id>` | Add to an existing convoy |

**Example:**

```bash
bd create --title "Fix login bug" --type bug --priority high
# Created: gt-abc12

bd create --title "Add email validation" --type feature --description "Validate email format on registration form" --rig myproject
# Created: gt-def34

bd create --title "Auth epic" --type epic
# Created: gt-epc01
```

---

### `bd list`

List beads with optional filters.

```bash
bd list [options]
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--status <status>` | Filter: `open`, `in_progress`, `closed`, `pending`, `hooked` |
| `--type <type>` | Filter by type |
| `--priority <level>` | Filter by priority |
| `--rig <name>` | Filter by rig |
| `--label <label>` | Filter by label |
| `--limit <n>` | Maximum number of results |
| `--sort <field>` | Sort by: `created`, `updated`, `priority` |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

**Example:**

```bash
# List all open beads
bd list --status open

# List high-priority bugs
bd list --type bug --priority high

# List recent 10 beads
bd list --limit 10 --sort updated
```

---

### `bd show`

Show detailed information about a bead.

```bash
bd show <bead-id> [options]
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--comments` | Include comments |

**Example:**

```bash
bd show gt-abc12
```

---

### `bd update`

Update a bead's fields.

```bash
bd update <bead-id> [options]
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--title <text>` | Update title |
| `--priority <level>` | Update priority |
| `--type <type>` | Update type |
| `--status <status>` | Update status |
| `--description <text>` | Update description |
| `--label <label>` | Add a label |
| `--remove-label <label>` | Remove a label |
| `--comment <text>` | Add a comment |
| `--assign <agent>` | Assign to an agent |

**Example:**

```bash
bd update gt-abc12 --priority critical --comment "This is blocking production"
bd update gt-def34 --status in_progress --assign polecat/toast
```

---

### `bd close`

Close a bead.

```bash
bd close <bead-id> [options]
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--reason <text>` | Closure reason |
| `--comment <text>` | Add a final comment |

**Example:**

```bash
bd close gt-abc12 --reason "Fixed in PR #42"
```

---

### `bd sync`

Synchronize the beads database.

```bash
bd sync [options]
```

**Description:** Syncs the local beads SQLite database with the git-backed storage. Ensures all beads are consistent across agents and workspaces.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Force full resync |
| `--rig <name>` | Sync a specific rig's beads only |

**Example:**

```bash
bd sync
bd sync --rig myproject
```

---

## Bead Subcommands (gt)

### `gt bead show`

Show bead details through the `gt` interface.

```bash
gt bead show <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Similar to `bd show` but integrates with Gas Town context, showing additional information like hook status, convoy membership, and agent assignment.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--verbose` | Show extended details |

**Example:**

```bash
gt bead show gt-abc12
```

---

### `gt bead read`

Read a bead's full content into the agent context.

```bash
gt bead read <bead-id>
```

**Description:** Loads the complete bead content (description, comments, history) into the current agent's working context. Primarily used by agents to understand their assigned work.

**Example:**

```bash
gt bead read gt-abc12
```

---

### `gt bead move`

Move a bead between rigs.

```bash
gt bead move <bead-id> <target-rig> [options]
```

**Description:** Transfers a bead from one rig to another. Useful when work is reassigned to a different project.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Move even if the bead is currently hooked |

**Example:**

```bash
gt bead move gt-abc12 docs
gt bead move gt-def34 myproject --force
```

The following diagram shows the priority-based escalation routing for different bead priority levels.

```mermaid
pie title Bead Exit States in Typical Workflow
    "COMPLETED — merged to main" : 75
    "ESCALATED — needs human input" : 10
    "DEFERRED — paused for later" : 10
    "PHASE_COMPLETE — gate point" : 5
```

:::note

Moving a hooked bead without `--force` will fail. Unsling it first, or use `--force` to automatically unsling before moving.


:::
## Related

- [Work Distribution](../architecture/work-distribution.md) -- How work flows through Gas Town
- [Beads](../concepts/beads.md) -- The issue tracking system underlying work commands
- [GUPP (Propulsion Principle)](../concepts/gupp.md) -- The hook-driven execution model

### Blog Posts

- [Why Beads? AI-Native Issue Tracking](/blog/why-beads) -- Why Gas Town built its own issue tracker and how Beads differs from Jira, GitHub Issues, and Linear
- [Hook-Driven Architecture: How Gas Town Agents Never Lose Work](/blog/hook-driven-architecture) -- A deep dive into the hook system that makes crash-safe, self-propelling agent workflows possible
- [Mastering gt sling: Work Assignment in Gas Town](/blog/mastering-gt-sling) -- Advanced patterns for assigning work to rigs and agents with gt sling
- [Work Distribution Patterns in Gas Town](/blog/work-distribution-patterns) -- End-to-end patterns for routing, prioritizing, and tracking work across your fleet

Commit message:

Raise test 45 threshold: doc admonitions from 6 to 7

docs/cli-reference/work.md, after:

---
title: "Work Management"
sidebar_position: 3
description: "Reference for gt sling, gt hook, gt done, and bd commands that create, assign, track, and complete work items."
---

# Work Management

Commands for creating, assigning, tracking, and completing work items. This includes both `gt` commands for work orchestration and `bd` (Beads) commands for issue tracking.

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Open: bd create
    Open --> Hooked: gt sling / gt hook
    Hooked --> InProgress: Agent starts work
    InProgress --> Completed: gt done
    InProgress --> Escalated: gt done --escalate
    InProgress --> Deferred: gt done --defer
    InProgress --> Open: gt release / gt unsling
    Completed --> [*]: Merged to main
    Escalated --> Open: Resolved, re-assigned
```

---

## Work Orchestration

### `gt ready`

List work items that are ready for assignment.

```bash
gt ready [options]
```

**Description:** Shows beads in `pending` or `open` status that are not currently assigned to any agent. These are available for slinging to workers.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--rig <name>` | Filter to a specific rig |
| `--priority <level>` | Filter by priority: `critical`, `high`, `medium`, `low` |
| `--type <type>` | Filter by type: `bug`, `feature`, `task`, `chore` |
| `--convoy <id>` | Show only items in a specific convoy |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

**Example:**

```bash
# Show all ready work
gt ready

# Show high-priority bugs ready for work
gt ready --priority high --type bug

# Show ready work for a specific rig
gt ready --rig myproject
```

**Sample output:**

```text
ID         PRIORITY   TYPE      TITLE                           RIG
gt-abc12   high       bug       Fix login redirect loop         myproject
gt-def34   medium     feature   Add email validation            myproject
gt-ghi56   low        task      Update API documentation        docs
```

---

### `gt sling`

Assign work to a rig or agent.

```bash
gt sling <bead-id>... <target> [options]
```

**Description:** The primary command for assigning work. Hooks the bead to the target, updates its status, and spawns a polecat to execute the work. This is the central work distribution command in Gas Town.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--agent <runtime>` | Agent runtime for the spawned polecat |
| `--name <name>` | Name for the spawned polecat |
| `--priority` | Override bead priority for scheduling |
| `--no-spawn` | Hook the work but do not spawn a polecat |

**Example:**

```bash
# Assign a single bead to a rig (auto-spawns polecat)
gt sling gt-abc12 myproject

# Assign multiple beads
gt sling gt-abc12 gt-def34 myproject

# Assign with a specific agent
gt sling gt-abc12 myproject --agent cursor

# Hook work without spawning (manual pickup later)
gt sling gt-abc12 myproject --no-spawn
```

**What happens:**

1. Bead status changes to `hooked`
2. Work attaches to the target's hook
3. A polecat spawns in the rig (unless `--no-spawn`)
4. The polecat's startup hook finds and begins the work

:::tip

The Mayor typically handles slinging automatically. Use `gt sling` for manual assignment or when fine-grained control is needed. For understanding the full workflow from Mayor to merged code, see [Mayor Workflow](/blog/mayor-workflow).

:::

---

### `gt hook`

View or attach work to the current agent's hook.

```bash
gt hook [bead-id] [options]
```

**Description:** Without arguments, shows what is currently on the agent's hook. With a bead ID, attaches that work item to the hook. The hook is Gas Town's durability primitive -- work on a hook survives session restarts, compaction, and crashes.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

**Example:**

```bash
# Show current hook
gt hook

# Attach work to hook
gt hook gt-abc12
```

**Sample output:**

```text
Hook: gt-abc12 "Fix login redirect loop" [in_progress]
  Rig: myproject
  Branch: fix/login-bug
  Convoy: hq-cv-001
  Hooked: 15m ago
```

---

### `gt unsling`

Remove work from a hook without completing it.

```bash
gt unsling <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Detaches work from an agent's hook and sets the bead back to an assignable state. Use this when work needs to be reassigned or when a polecat should not continue with a task.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--release` | Also release the bead back to `open` status |
| `--force` | Force unsling even if the agent is actively working |

**Example:**

```bash
# Unsling from current agent
gt unsling gt-abc12

# Unsling and release back to ready pool
gt unsling gt-abc12 --release
```

---

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    DONE[gt done] --> COMMIT[Commit remaining changes]
    COMMIT --> PUSH[Push branch]
    PUSH --> MR[Create merge request]
    MR --> STATUS[Update bead status → completed]
    STATUS --> EXIT[Exit polecat session]
    MR --> REF[Refinery picks up MR]
    REF --> REVIEW[Automated review + merge to main]
```

### `gt done`

Mark work as complete and submit a merge request.

```bash
gt done [options]
```

**Description:** The standard polecat exit command. Commits any remaining changes, pushes the branch, creates a merge request for the Refinery, updates the bead status, and exits the polecat session. This is the happy-path completion for any piece of work.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--message <msg>` | MR description / completion summary |
| `--no-mr` | Complete without creating a merge request |
| `--escalate` | Exit with escalation instead of completion |
| `--defer` | Exit with deferred status (work paused, not done) |
| `--phase` | Exit with phase-complete status (gate point) |

**Example:**

```bash
# Standard completion
gt done --message "Fixed login redirect by correcting OAuth callback URL"

# Complete without MR (e.g., documentation-only changes)
gt done --no-mr --message "Updated local docs only"

# Escalate a blocker
gt done --escalate --message "Blocked: need API credentials for staging"
```

**Exit states:**

| Flag | Exit State | Meaning |
|------|-----------|---------|
| (default) | `COMPLETED` | Work done, MR submitted to Refinery |
| `--escalate` | `ESCALATED` | Hit a blocker, needs human input |
| `--defer` | `DEFERRED` | Paused, another agent can pick up later |
| `--phase` | `PHASE_COMPLETE` | Phase done, waiting for gate |

---

:::warning

Running `gt done --escalate` marks the bead as escalated and exits the polecat session immediately. Make sure to commit and push all work before escalating, as the polecat will not get another chance to save changes after the escalation exit.

:::

:::tip

When a polecat escalates with `gt done --escalate`, the bead remains hooked to that polecat until explicitly unslung or reassigned. Use `gt unsling --release` to free the bead back to the ready pool after addressing the escalated issue, rather than leaving it indefinitely hooked to a terminated polecat.

:::

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph "Work Discovery"
        A[gt ready] --> B[Filter by --priority]
        B --> C[Filter by --type]
        C --> D[List of available beads]
    end
    subgraph "Work Assignment"
        D --> E[gt sling bead target]
        E --> F[Bead status: hooked]
        F --> G[Polecat spawned]
    end
    subgraph "Work Completion"
        G --> H[gt done]
        H --> I{Exit state}
        I -->|COMPLETED| J[MR submitted]
        I -->|ESCALATED| K[Needs human input]
        I -->|DEFERRED| L[Paused for later]
    end
```

:::caution

When using `gt release --force` to free a bead from an active polecat, the polecat's hook is cleared but the polecat session remains running. This can cause the polecat to continue working on the now-released bead, creating duplicate or conflicting work. Always verify the polecat is stopped or idle before forcing a release.

:::

### `gt close`

Close a bead without going through the done workflow.

```bash
gt close <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Manually closes a bead. Useful for closing duplicate issues, items resolved by other means, or administrative cleanup.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--reason <text>` | Reason for closing |
| `--wontfix` | Close as won't fix |
| `--duplicate <id>` | Close as duplicate of another bead |

**Example:**

```bash
gt close gt-abc12 --reason "Resolved by upstream fix"
gt close gt-def34 --duplicate gt-abc12
gt close gt-ghi56 --wontfix
```

---

### `gt release`

Release a stuck in-progress bead back to the ready pool.

```bash
gt release <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Frees a bead that is stuck in `in_progress` or `hooked` status, making it available for reassignment. Essential for recovering from polecat crashes or stalled work.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Release even if an agent appears to still be working on it |

**Example:**

```bash
gt release gt-abc12
gt release gt-abc12 --force
```

:::tip

The Witness automatically detects stalled polecats and can release their work. Use `gt release` for manual intervention.

:::

---

### `gt show`

Show detailed information about a bead or work item.

```bash
gt show <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Displays comprehensive information about a bead including its status, history, assigned agent, convoy membership, and related activity.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--history` | Include full status change history |
| `--comments` | Include all comments |

**Example:**

```bash
gt show gt-abc12
gt show gt-abc12 --history
```

**Sample output:**

```text
Bead: gt-abc12
Title: Fix login redirect loop
Type: bug
Priority: high
Status: in_progress
Rig: myproject
Agent: polecat/toast
Branch: fix/login-bug
Convoy: hq-cv-001
Created: 2h ago
Updated: 15m ago
```

---

### `gt cat`

Output the raw content of a bead or work artifact.

```bash
gt cat <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Prints the raw bead content, including description, comments, and metadata. Useful for piping into other tools or for programmatic access.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--field <name>` | Output only a specific field |
| `--format <fmt>` | Output format: `text`, `json`, `yaml` |

**Example:**

```bash
# Full bead content
gt cat gt-abc12

# Just the description
gt cat gt-abc12 --field description

# JSON output for scripting
gt cat gt-abc12 --format json
```

---

### `gt commit`

Git commit with automatic agent identity.

```bash
gt commit [flags] [-- git-commit-args...]
```

**Description:** A git commit wrapper that automatically sets the git author identity for agents. When run by an agent (with `GT_ROLE` set), it detects the agent identity from environment variables and converts it to a git-friendly name and email. When run by a human (no `GT_ROLE`), it passes through to plain `git commit`.

**Example:**

```bash
# Commit as current agent
gt commit -m "Fix bug"

# Stage all and commit
gt commit -am "Quick fix"

# Amend last commit
gt commit -- --amend
```

**Identity mapping:**

```text
Agent: gastown/crew/jack  →  Name: gastown/crew/jack
                              Email: gastown.crew.jack@gastown.local
```

:::tip

The email domain is configurable in town settings (`agent_email_domain`). Default: `gastown.local`.

:::

---

```mermaid
graph LR
    CREATE[bd create] --> READY[gt ready]
    READY --> SLING[gt sling bead rig]
    SLING --> HOOK[Bead on hook]
    HOOK --> WORK[Agent works]
    WORK --> DONE[gt done]
    DONE --> MR[Merge request]
    MR --> MERGE[Refinery merges]
    MERGE --> CLOSE[Bead closed]
```

### `gt gate`

Gate coordination for async workflows.

```bash
gt gate <subcommand>
```

**Description:** Gates provide async coordination points in workflows. Most gate operations are in the `bd` CLI (`bd gate create`, `bd gate show`, `bd gate list`, `bd gate close`, `bd gate approve`, `bd gate eval`). The `gt gate` command adds Gas Town integration.

**Subcommands:**

| Subcommand | Description |
|------------|-------------|
| `gt gate wake` | Send wake mail to gate waiters after a gate closes |

**Example:**

```bash
gt gate wake <gate-id>
```

---

## Beads (Issue Tracking)

Beads is the git-backed issue tracking system integrated into Gas Town. The `bd` CLI manages beads directly.

### `bd create`

Create a new bead (issue).

```bash
bd create [options]
```

**Description:** Creates a new bead in the beads database. Beads are the fundamental work unit in Gas Town.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--title <text>` | Bead title (required) |
| `--type <type>` | Type: `bug`, `feature`, `task`, `chore`, `epic` |
| `--priority <level>` | Priority: `critical`, `high`, `medium`, `low` |
| `--description <text>` | Detailed description |
| `--rig <name>` | Assign to a specific rig |
| `--label <label>` | Add labels (can be repeated) |
| `--parent <id>` | Set parent bead for hierarchical tracking |
| `--convoy <id>` | Add to an existing convoy |

**Example:**

```bash
bd create --title "Fix login bug" --type bug --priority high
# Created: gt-abc12

bd create --title "Add email validation" --type feature --description "Validate email format on registration form" --rig myproject
# Created: gt-def34

bd create --title "Auth epic" --type epic
# Created: gt-epc01
```

---

### `bd list`

List beads with optional filters.

```bash
bd list [options]
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--status <status>` | Filter: `open`, `in_progress`, `closed`, `pending`, `hooked` |
| `--type <type>` | Filter by type |
| `--priority <level>` | Filter by priority |
| `--rig <name>` | Filter by rig |
| `--label <label>` | Filter by label |
| `--limit <n>` | Maximum number of results |
| `--sort <field>` | Sort by: `created`, `updated`, `priority` |
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |

**Example:**

```bash
# List all open beads
bd list --status open

# List high-priority bugs
bd list --type bug --priority high

# List recent 10 beads
bd list --limit 10 --sort updated
```

---

### `bd show`

Show detailed information about a bead.

```bash
bd show <bead-id> [options]
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--comments` | Include comments |

**Example:**

```bash
bd show gt-abc12
```

---

### `bd update`

Update a bead's fields.

```bash
bd update <bead-id> [options]
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--title <text>` | Update title |
| `--priority <level>` | Update priority |
| `--type <type>` | Update type |
| `--status <status>` | Update status |
| `--description <text>` | Update description |
| `--label <label>` | Add a label |
| `--remove-label <label>` | Remove a label |
| `--comment <text>` | Add a comment |
| `--assign <agent>` | Assign to an agent |

**Example:**

```bash
bd update gt-abc12 --priority critical --comment "This is blocking production"
bd update gt-def34 --status in_progress --assign polecat/toast
```

---

### `bd close`

Close a bead.

```bash
bd close <bead-id> [options]
```

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--reason <text>` | Closure reason |
| `--comment <text>` | Add a final comment |

**Example:**

```bash
bd close gt-abc12 --reason "Fixed in PR #42"
```

---

### `bd sync`

Synchronize the beads database.

```bash
bd sync [options]
```

**Description:** Syncs the local beads SQLite database with the git-backed storage. Ensures all beads are consistent across agents and workspaces.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Force full resync |
| `--rig <name>` | Sync a specific rig's beads only |

**Example:**

```bash
bd sync
bd sync --rig myproject
```

---

## Bead Subcommands (gt)

### `gt bead show`

Show bead details through the `gt` interface.

```bash
gt bead show <bead-id> [options]
```

**Description:** Similar to `bd show` but integrates with Gas Town context, showing additional information like hook status, convoy membership, and agent assignment.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--json` | Output in JSON format |
| `--verbose` | Show extended details |

**Example:**

```bash
gt bead show gt-abc12
```

---

### `gt bead read`

Read a bead's full content into the agent context.

```bash
gt bead read <bead-id>
```

**Description:** Loads the complete bead content (description, comments, history) into the current agent's working context. Primarily used by agents to understand their assigned work.

**Example:**

```bash
gt bead read gt-abc12
```

---

### `gt bead move`

Move a bead between rigs.

```bash
gt bead move <bead-id> <target-rig> [options]
```

**Description:** Transfers a bead from one rig to another. Useful when work is reassigned to a different project.

**Options:**

| Flag | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `--force` | Move even if the bead is currently hooked |

**Example:**

```bash
gt bead move gt-abc12 docs
gt bead move gt-def34 myproject --force
```

The following diagram shows the priority-based escalation routing for different bead priority levels.

```mermaid
pie title Bead Exit States in Typical Workflow
    "COMPLETED — merged to main" : 75
    "ESCALATED — needs human input" : 10
    "DEFERRED — paused for later" : 10
    "PHASE_COMPLETE — gate point" : 5
```

:::note

Moving a hooked bead without `--force` will fail. Unsling it first, or use `--force` to automatically unsling before moving.


:::
## Related

- [Work Distribution](../architecture/work-distribution.md) -- How work flows through Gas Town
- [Beads](../concepts/beads.md) -- The issue tracking system underlying work commands
- [GUPP (Propulsion Principle)](../concepts/gupp.md) -- The hook-driven execution model

### Blog Posts

- [Why Beads? AI-Native Issue Tracking](/blog/why-beads) -- Why Gas Town built its own issue tracker and how Beads differs from Jira, GitHub Issues, and Linear
- [Hook-Driven Architecture: How Gas Town Agents Never Lose Work](/blog/hook-driven-architecture) -- A deep dive into the hook system that makes crash-safe, self-propelling agent workflows possible
- [Mastering gt sling: Work Assignment in Gas Town](/blog/mastering-gt-sling) -- Advanced patterns for assigning work to rigs and agents with gt sling
- [Work Distribution Patterns in Gas Town](/blog/work-distribution-patterns) -- End-to-end patterns for routing, prioritizing, and tracking work across your fleet
