docs/workflows/formula-workflow.md, before:

---
title: "Formula Workflow"
sidebar_position: 4
description: "Run structured, repeatable workflows using predefined TOML formula templates for releases, code reviews, and audits."
---

# Formula Workflow

The **Formula Workflow** uses predefined TOML templates to orchestrate structured, repeatable processes. Instead of describing work in free-form text, you select a formula that defines the exact steps, run it with variables, and let Gas Town execute the workflow. This is ideal for standardized processes like releases, design explorations, and audits.

---

## When to Use This Workflow

- You have a repeatable process with defined steps
- You want consistency across executions (every release follows the same steps)
- You want to leverage built-in formulas for code review, design, or audits
- You are creating custom workflows for your team

:::info[Prerequisites]

- Gas Town installed with at least one rig
- Formulas available in `.beads/formulas/`
- For convoy formulas: Tmux and multiple polecats

:::

## Overview

```mermaid
graph LR
    F["Formula<br/>(TOML template)"] -->|gt formula run| M["Molecule<br/>(live instance)"]
    M --> S1["Step 1: Design ✓"]
    M --> S2["Step 2: Implement ●"]
    M --> S3["Step 3: Review ○"]
    M --> S4["Step 4: Test ○"]
    M --> S5["Step 5: Submit ○"]
```

## Step-by-Step

### Step 1: Browse Available Formulas

List all available formulas in your workspace:

```bash
gt formula list
```

Example output:

```text
Name                        Type      Steps  Description
shiny                       workflow  5      Design-implement-review-test-submit
shiny-secure                workflow  6      Shiny with security audit
code-review                 convoy    10     Parallel multi-dimension code review
design                      convoy    6      Parallel design exploration
security-audit              convoy    4      Security-focused analysis
mol-polecat-work            workflow  9      Full polecat work lifecycle
rule-of-five                convoy    5      Five-perspective analysis
...
```

### Step 2: Examine a Formula

View the details of a formula before running it:

```bash
gt formula show shiny
```

This shows:

- Description and purpose
- Step sequence with dependencies
- Required and optional variables
- For convoy formulas: parallel legs and synthesis step

### Step 3: Run the Formula

Run a formula with the required variables:

```bash
# Run a simple workflow formula
gt formula run shiny --var feature="Add notification system"

# Run with multiple variables
gt formula run shiny --var feature="Add notifications" --var assignee="polecat/toast"
```

For convoy formulas with parallel execution:

```bash
# Run a code review
gt formula run code-review --pr=42

# Run a design exploration
gt formula run design --problem="Redesign the merge queue"

# Run with a specific preset
gt formula run code-review --pr=42 --preset=gate
```

### Step 4: Track Progress

Monitor the molecule's progress through its steps:

```bash
# Show molecule status
gt mol status

# Show detailed progress
gt mol progress <mol-id>

# Show the dependency graph
gt mol dag <mol-id>
```

Example progress output:

```text
Molecule: mol-shiny-x1y2z "Add notification system"
Formula: shiny v1
Progress: 2/5 steps complete

Steps:
  [✓] design          Design Add notification system
  [✓] implement       Implement Add notification system
  [●] review          Review implementation
  [ ] test            Test Add notification system
  [ ] submit          Submit for merge
```

### Step 5: Advance Steps

For workflow formulas, the assigned agent advances through steps. You can also manually mark steps:

```bash
# Mark current step as done
gt mol step done

# The next step becomes active automatically
gt mol status
```

### Step 6: Completion

When all steps are complete, the molecule finishes. For convoy formulas, the synthesis step runs after all parallel legs complete.

## Formula Types in Detail

### Workflow Formulas

Workflow formulas define a linear (or DAG) sequence of steps executed by a single agent:

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[design] --> B[implement]
    B --> C[review]
    C --> D[test]
    D --> E[submit]
```

**Built-in workflow formulas:**

| Formula | Steps | Use Case |
|---------|-------|----------|
| `shiny` | 5 | Standard: design, implement, review, test, submit |
| `shiny-secure` | 6 | Adds security audit after review |
| `shiny-enterprise` | 7+ | Full enterprise gates (human approvals) |
| `mol-polecat-work` | 9 | Complete polecat lifecycle with preflight |

**Example: The `shiny` formula**

```toml
[[steps]]
id = "design"
title = "Design {{feature}}"
description = "Think carefully about architecture..."

[[steps]]
id = "implement"
needs = ["design"]
title = "Implement {{feature}}"
description = "Write the code..."

[[steps]]
id = "review"
needs = ["implement"]
title = "Review implementation"
description = "Self-review the changes..."

[[steps]]
id = "test"
needs = ["review"]
title = "Test {{feature}}"
description = "Write and run tests..."

[[steps]]
id = "submit"
needs = ["test"]
title = "Submit for merge"
description = "Final check and submit..."
```

### Convoy Formulas

Convoy formulas spawn multiple parallel agents (legs), each working on a different dimension of a problem. A synthesis step combines the results:

```mermaid
graph TD
    Start[Formula Run] --> L1[Leg: correctness]
    Start --> L2[Leg: security]
    Start --> L3[Leg: performance]
    Start --> L4[Leg: elegance]

    L1 --> Synth[Synthesis]
    L2 --> Synth
    L3 --> Synth
    L4 --> Synth

    Synth --> Result[Unified Output]
```

**Built-in convoy formulas:**

| Formula | Legs | Use Case |
|---------|------|----------|
| `code-review` | 10 | Comprehensive code review from multiple perspectives |
| `design` | 6 | Design exploration across API, data, UX, scale, security, integration |
| `security-audit` | 4 | Focused security analysis |
| `rule-of-five` | 5 | Five-perspective general analysis |

**Code review presets:**

| Preset | Legs | Purpose |
|--------|------|---------|
| `gate` | 4 | Light review: wiring, security, smells, test-quality |
| `full` | 10 | All legs for thorough review |
| `security-focused` | 4 | Security-heavy: security, resilience, correctness, wiring |
| `refactor` | 4 | Quality focus: elegance, smells, style, commit-discipline |

```bash
# Run with a preset
gt formula run code-review --pr=42 --preset=gate

# Run specific legs only
gt formula run code-review --pr=42 --legs=security,correctness,wiring
```

## Creating Custom Formulas

### Basic Workflow Formula

Create a new TOML file in `.beads/formulas/`:

```toml
# .beads/formulas/my-release.formula.toml
description = "Release workflow for production deployment"
formula = "my-release"
type = "workflow"
version = 1

[[steps]]
id = "version-bump"
title = "Bump version to {{version}}"
description = "Update version numbers in all relevant files"

[[steps]]
id = "changelog"
title = "Update changelog"
needs = ["version-bump"]
description = "Generate and review changelog entries"

[[steps]]
id = "build"
title = "Build release artifacts"
needs = ["changelog"]
description = "Run the build pipeline and verify artifacts"

[[steps]]
id = "smoke-test"
title = "Run smoke tests"
needs = ["build"]
description = "Execute smoke test suite against built artifacts"

[[steps]]
id = "tag-release"
title = "Tag and publish v{{version}}"
needs = ["smoke-test"]
description = "Create git tag and publish release"

[vars]
[vars.version]
description = "Release version (e.g., 2.3.1)"
required = true
```

Run it:

```bash
gt formula run my-release --var version="2.3.1"
```

### Custom Convoy Formula

```toml
# .beads/formulas/incident-review.formula.toml
description = "Post-incident review from multiple perspectives"
formula = "incident-review"
type = "convoy"
version = 1

[inputs]
[inputs.incident]
description = "Incident ID or description"
type = "string"
required = true

[[legs]]
id = "timeline"
title = "Timeline Reconstruction"
focus = "What happened and when"
description = "Reconstruct the incident timeline..."

[[legs]]
id = "root-cause"
title = "Root Cause Analysis"
focus = "Why it happened"
description = "Identify the root cause..."

[[legs]]
id = "impact"
title = "Impact Assessment"
focus = "What was affected"
description = "Assess the blast radius..."

[[legs]]
id = "prevention"
title = "Prevention Plan"
focus = "How to prevent recurrence"
description = "Propose preventive measures..."

[synthesis]
title = "Incident Report"
description = "Synthesize all analyses into a unified incident report..."
depends_on = ["timeline", "root-cause", "impact", "prevention"]
```

### Formula CLI Reference

```bash
# Create a formula interactively
gt formula create my-workflow

# List all formulas
gt formula list

# Show formula details
gt formula show <name>

# Run a formula
gt formula run <name> --var key=value

# Run with preset (convoy formulas)
gt formula run <name> --preset=<preset-name>
```

The following diagram shows the step dependencies in a typical workflow formula where each step must complete before the next begins:

```mermaid
gantt
    title Shiny Formula Step Execution
    dateFormat X
    axisFormat %s

    section Workflow
    Design           :done, d, 0, 3
    Implement        :active, i, 3, 8
    Review           :r, 8, 10
    Test             :t, 10, 13
    Submit           :s, 13, 14
```

:::note[Formula Reusability Across Rigs]
Well-designed formulas are rig-agnostic and can be reused across multiple projects. When creating custom formulas, avoid hardcoding rig-specific paths or assumptions. Use variables for rig names, file paths, and configuration values to maximize reusability. A formula that works for one rig should work for any rig with minimal parameter changes. For custom formula patterns, see [Building Your First Custom Formula](/blog/custom-formulas).
:::

:::warning[Version Lock for Active Molecules]
When you modify a formula that already has active molecules running, the active molecules continue using the old formula definition they were poured from. This means changing a formula's steps will not affect in-progress work. Always increment the formula's version number for breaking changes, and document which version each molecule uses to avoid confusion when troubleshooting workflow issues.
:::

## Variables and Templating

Formulas use Go `text/template` syntax for variable interpolation:

```toml
[[steps]]
title = "Implement {{.feature}}"
description = "Build the {{.feature}} feature for {{.assignee}}"
```

Variables are provided at runtime via `--var`:

```bash
gt formula run shiny --var feature="notifications" --var assignee="toast"
```

### Variable Definitions

```toml
[vars]
[vars.feature]
description = "The feature being implemented"
required = true

[vars.assignee]
description = "Who is assigned"
required = false
default = "auto"
```

| Field | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `description` | Explains what the variable is for |
| `required` | Whether the formula fails without it |
| `default` | Default value if not provided |

## Best Practices

:::tip[Start with Built-in Formulas]

Gas Town ships with well-tested formulas for common workflows. Try `shiny` for feature work and `code-review` for reviews before creating custom formulas.

:::

:::tip[Keep Steps Atomic]

Each step should represent one logical unit of work. If a step is too large, the agent may lose context. If too small, the overhead of step tracking outweighs the benefit.

:::

:::tip[Use Gates for External Waits]

If a step needs to wait for CI, human approval, or a timer, use a [Gate](../concepts/gates.md) instead of busy-waiting. Gates let the agent park the workflow and resume when the condition is met.

:::

:::warning[Formula Versioning]

Increment the `version` field when making breaking changes to a formula. Existing molecules poured from the old version will continue using the old step definitions.


:::

The following pie chart shows the typical usage distribution of different formula types in a Gas Town deployment:

```mermaid
pie title Formula Usage by Type (Typical Deployment)
    "shiny (standard workflow)" : 45
    "code-review (convoy)" : 25
    "shiny-secure (workflow)" : 15
    "design exploration (convoy)" : 8
    "custom formulas" : 7
```

### Formula Execution Pipeline

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    SELECT[Select Formula] --> VARS[Provide Variables]
    VARS --> POUR[gt formula run]
    POUR --> MOL[Molecule Created]
    MOL --> STEPS{Formula Type?}
    STEPS -->|Workflow| SEQ[Sequential Steps]
    STEPS -->|Convoy| PAR[Parallel Legs]
    SEQ --> DONE[All Steps Complete]
    PAR --> SYNTH[Synthesis Step]
    SYNTH --> DONE
    DONE --> OUTPUT[Final Output]
```

## Related

- [Molecules](../concepts/molecules.md) -- How molecules track multi-step workflows and provide crash recovery
- [Gates](../concepts/gates.md) -- Async coordination primitives used within formula steps
- [Code Review Workflow](code-review.md) -- The convoy formula for parallel multi-perspective code review
- [MEOW Stack](../concepts/meow-stack.md) -- The layered abstraction model from molecules to full orchestration

### Blog Posts

- [Building Your First Custom Formula](/blog/custom-formulas) -- Step-by-step guide to creating TOML formulas for custom agent workflows
- [Advanced Convoy Orchestration Patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns) -- Cross-rig tracking, dependency chains, and parallel fan-out for convoy formulas
- [Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns) -- Decision framework comparing formula workflows with manual convoys and Mayor orchestration
- [Formula Design Patterns for Gas Town](/blog/formula-design-patterns) -- Reusable patterns for structuring TOML formulas with steps, gates, and variable templating
- [Molecules and Formulas: Gas Town's Workflow Engine](/blog/molecules-and-formulas) -- How molecules power the formula workflow engine

Commit message:

Raise test 45 threshold: doc admonitions from 7 to 8

docs/workflows/formula-workflow.md, after:

---
title: "Formula Workflow"
sidebar_position: 4
description: "Run structured, repeatable workflows using predefined TOML formula templates for releases, code reviews, and audits."
---

# Formula Workflow

The **Formula Workflow** uses predefined TOML templates to orchestrate structured, repeatable processes. Instead of describing work in free-form text, you select a formula that defines the exact steps, run it with variables, and let Gas Town execute the workflow. This is ideal for standardized processes like releases, design explorations, and audits.

---

## When to Use This Workflow

- You have a repeatable process with defined steps
- You want consistency across executions (every release follows the same steps)
- You want to leverage built-in formulas for code review, design, or audits
- You are creating custom workflows for your team

:::info[Prerequisites]

- Gas Town installed with at least one rig
- Formulas available in `.beads/formulas/`
- For convoy formulas: Tmux and multiple polecats

:::

## Overview

```mermaid
graph LR
    F["Formula<br/>(TOML template)"] -->|gt formula run| M["Molecule<br/>(live instance)"]
    M --> S1["Step 1: Design ✓"]
    M --> S2["Step 2: Implement ●"]
    M --> S3["Step 3: Review ○"]
    M --> S4["Step 4: Test ○"]
    M --> S5["Step 5: Submit ○"]
```

## Step-by-Step

### Step 1: Browse Available Formulas

List all available formulas in your workspace:

```bash
gt formula list
```

Example output:

```text
Name                        Type      Steps  Description
shiny                       workflow  5      Design-implement-review-test-submit
shiny-secure                workflow  6      Shiny with security audit
code-review                 convoy    10     Parallel multi-dimension code review
design                      convoy    6      Parallel design exploration
security-audit              convoy    4      Security-focused analysis
mol-polecat-work            workflow  9      Full polecat work lifecycle
rule-of-five                convoy    5      Five-perspective analysis
...
```

### Step 2: Examine a Formula

View the details of a formula before running it:

```bash
gt formula show shiny
```

This shows:

- Description and purpose
- Step sequence with dependencies
- Required and optional variables
- For convoy formulas: parallel legs and synthesis step

### Step 3: Run the Formula

Run a formula with the required variables:

```bash
# Run a simple workflow formula
gt formula run shiny --var feature="Add notification system"

# Run with multiple variables
gt formula run shiny --var feature="Add notifications" --var assignee="polecat/toast"
```

For convoy formulas with parallel execution:

```bash
# Run a code review
gt formula run code-review --pr=42

# Run a design exploration
gt formula run design --problem="Redesign the merge queue"

# Run with a specific preset
gt formula run code-review --pr=42 --preset=gate
```

### Step 4: Track Progress

Monitor the molecule's progress through its steps:

```bash
# Show molecule status
gt mol status

# Show detailed progress
gt mol progress <mol-id>

# Show the dependency graph
gt mol dag <mol-id>
```

Example progress output:

```text
Molecule: mol-shiny-x1y2z "Add notification system"
Formula: shiny v1
Progress: 2/5 steps complete

Steps:
  [✓] design          Design Add notification system
  [✓] implement       Implement Add notification system
  [●] review          Review implementation
  [ ] test            Test Add notification system
  [ ] submit          Submit for merge
```

### Step 5: Advance Steps

For workflow formulas, the assigned agent advances through steps. You can also manually mark steps:

```bash
# Mark current step as done
gt mol step done

# The next step becomes active automatically
gt mol status
```

### Step 6: Completion

When all steps are complete, the molecule finishes. For convoy formulas, the synthesis step runs after all parallel legs complete.

## Formula Types in Detail

### Workflow Formulas

Workflow formulas define a linear (or DAG) sequence of steps executed by a single agent:

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[design] --> B[implement]
    B --> C[review]
    C --> D[test]
    D --> E[submit]
```

**Built-in workflow formulas:**

| Formula | Steps | Use Case |
|---------|-------|----------|
| `shiny` | 5 | Standard: design, implement, review, test, submit |
| `shiny-secure` | 6 | Adds security audit after review |
| `shiny-enterprise` | 7+ | Full enterprise gates (human approvals) |
| `mol-polecat-work` | 9 | Complete polecat lifecycle with preflight |

**Example: The `shiny` formula**

```toml
[[steps]]
id = "design"
title = "Design {{feature}}"
description = "Think carefully about architecture..."

[[steps]]
id = "implement"
needs = ["design"]
title = "Implement {{feature}}"
description = "Write the code..."

[[steps]]
id = "review"
needs = ["implement"]
title = "Review implementation"
description = "Self-review the changes..."

[[steps]]
id = "test"
needs = ["review"]
title = "Test {{feature}}"
description = "Write and run tests..."

[[steps]]
id = "submit"
needs = ["test"]
title = "Submit for merge"
description = "Final check and submit..."
```

### Convoy Formulas

Convoy formulas spawn multiple parallel agents (legs), each working on a different dimension of a problem. A synthesis step combines the results:

```mermaid
graph TD
    Start[Formula Run] --> L1[Leg: correctness]
    Start --> L2[Leg: security]
    Start --> L3[Leg: performance]
    Start --> L4[Leg: elegance]

    L1 --> Synth[Synthesis]
    L2 --> Synth
    L3 --> Synth
    L4 --> Synth

    Synth --> Result[Unified Output]
```

**Built-in convoy formulas:**

| Formula | Legs | Use Case |
|---------|------|----------|
| `code-review` | 10 | Comprehensive code review from multiple perspectives |
| `design` | 6 | Design exploration across API, data, UX, scale, security, integration |
| `security-audit` | 4 | Focused security analysis |
| `rule-of-five` | 5 | Five-perspective general analysis |

**Code review presets:**

| Preset | Legs | Purpose |
|--------|------|---------|
| `gate` | 4 | Light review: wiring, security, smells, test-quality |
| `full` | 10 | All legs for thorough review |
| `security-focused` | 4 | Security-heavy: security, resilience, correctness, wiring |
| `refactor` | 4 | Quality focus: elegance, smells, style, commit-discipline |

```bash
# Run with a preset
gt formula run code-review --pr=42 --preset=gate

# Run specific legs only
gt formula run code-review --pr=42 --legs=security,correctness,wiring
```

## Creating Custom Formulas

### Basic Workflow Formula

Create a new TOML file in `.beads/formulas/`:

```toml
# .beads/formulas/my-release.formula.toml
description = "Release workflow for production deployment"
formula = "my-release"
type = "workflow"
version = 1

[[steps]]
id = "version-bump"
title = "Bump version to {{version}}"
description = "Update version numbers in all relevant files"

[[steps]]
id = "changelog"
title = "Update changelog"
needs = ["version-bump"]
description = "Generate and review changelog entries"

[[steps]]
id = "build"
title = "Build release artifacts"
needs = ["changelog"]
description = "Run the build pipeline and verify artifacts"

[[steps]]
id = "smoke-test"
title = "Run smoke tests"
needs = ["build"]
description = "Execute smoke test suite against built artifacts"

[[steps]]
id = "tag-release"
title = "Tag and publish v{{version}}"
needs = ["smoke-test"]
description = "Create git tag and publish release"

[vars]
[vars.version]
description = "Release version (e.g., 2.3.1)"
required = true
```

Run it:

```bash
gt formula run my-release --var version="2.3.1"
```

### Custom Convoy Formula

```toml
# .beads/formulas/incident-review.formula.toml
description = "Post-incident review from multiple perspectives"
formula = "incident-review"
type = "convoy"
version = 1

[inputs]
[inputs.incident]
description = "Incident ID or description"
type = "string"
required = true

[[legs]]
id = "timeline"
title = "Timeline Reconstruction"
focus = "What happened and when"
description = "Reconstruct the incident timeline..."

[[legs]]
id = "root-cause"
title = "Root Cause Analysis"
focus = "Why it happened"
description = "Identify the root cause..."

[[legs]]
id = "impact"
title = "Impact Assessment"
focus = "What was affected"
description = "Assess the blast radius..."

[[legs]]
id = "prevention"
title = "Prevention Plan"
focus = "How to prevent recurrence"
description = "Propose preventive measures..."

[synthesis]
title = "Incident Report"
description = "Synthesize all analyses into a unified incident report..."
depends_on = ["timeline", "root-cause", "impact", "prevention"]
```

### Formula CLI Reference

```bash
# Create a formula interactively
gt formula create my-workflow

# List all formulas
gt formula list

# Show formula details
gt formula show <name>

# Run a formula
gt formula run <name> --var key=value

# Run with preset (convoy formulas)
gt formula run <name> --preset=<preset-name>
```

The following diagram shows the step dependencies in a typical workflow formula where each step must complete before the next begins:

```mermaid
gantt
    title Shiny Formula Step Execution
    dateFormat X
    axisFormat %s

    section Workflow
    Design           :done, d, 0, 3
    Implement        :active, i, 3, 8
    Review           :r, 8, 10
    Test             :t, 10, 13
    Submit           :s, 13, 14
```

:::note[Formula Reusability Across Rigs]
Well-designed formulas are rig-agnostic and can be reused across multiple projects. When creating custom formulas, avoid hardcoding rig-specific paths or assumptions. Use variables for rig names, file paths, and configuration values to maximize reusability. A formula that works for one rig should work for any rig with minimal parameter changes. For custom formula patterns, see [Building Your First Custom Formula](/blog/custom-formulas).
:::

:::warning[Version Lock for Active Molecules]
When you modify a formula that already has active molecules running, the active molecules continue using the old formula definition they were poured from. This means changing a formula's steps will not affect in-progress work. Always increment the formula's version number for breaking changes, and document which version each molecule uses to avoid confusion when troubleshooting workflow issues.
:::

## Variables and Templating

Formulas use Go `text/template` syntax for variable interpolation:

```toml
[[steps]]
title = "Implement {{.feature}}"
description = "Build the {{.feature}} feature for {{.assignee}}"
```

Variables are provided at runtime via `--var`:

```bash
gt formula run shiny --var feature="notifications" --var assignee="toast"
```

### Variable Definitions

```toml
[vars]
[vars.feature]
description = "The feature being implemented"
required = true

[vars.assignee]
description = "Who is assigned"
required = false
default = "auto"
```

| Field | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `description` | Explains what the variable is for |
| `required` | Whether the formula fails without it |
| `default` | Default value if not provided |

## Best Practices

:::tip[Start with Built-in Formulas]

Gas Town ships with well-tested formulas for common workflows. Try `shiny` for feature work and `code-review` for reviews before creating custom formulas.

:::

:::tip[Keep Steps Atomic]

Each step should represent one logical unit of work. If a step is too large, the agent may lose context. If too small, the overhead of step tracking outweighs the benefit.

:::

:::tip[Use Gates for External Waits]

If a step needs to wait for CI, human approval, or a timer, use a [Gate](../concepts/gates.md) instead of busy-waiting. Gates let the agent park the workflow and resume when the condition is met.

:::

:::warning[Formula Versioning]

Increment the `version` field when making breaking changes to a formula. Existing molecules poured from the old version will continue using the old step definitions.

:::

:::caution[Formula Debugging Without Version Control]

When iterating on a custom formula during development, you may be tempted to edit the TOML file repeatedly and re-run `gt formula run` to test changes. This works, but creates a debugging trap: if a molecule poured from an earlier version exhibits unexpected behavior, you have no record of which formula version produced it unless you explicitly version every iteration. During formula development, increment the version number on every significant edit and keep the old TOML files in a `formulas/archive/` directory. This makes it possible to correlate molecule behavior with the exact formula definition that created it.

:::

The following pie chart shows the typical usage distribution of different formula types in a Gas Town deployment:

```mermaid
pie title Formula Usage by Type (Typical Deployment)
    "shiny (standard workflow)" : 45
    "code-review (convoy)" : 25
    "shiny-secure (workflow)" : 15
    "design exploration (convoy)" : 8
    "custom formulas" : 7
```

### Formula Execution Pipeline

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    SELECT[Select Formula] --> VARS[Provide Variables]
    VARS --> POUR[gt formula run]
    POUR --> MOL[Molecule Created]
    MOL --> STEPS{Formula Type?}
    STEPS -->|Workflow| SEQ[Sequential Steps]
    STEPS -->|Convoy| PAR[Parallel Legs]
    SEQ --> DONE[All Steps Complete]
    PAR --> SYNTH[Synthesis Step]
    SYNTH --> DONE
    DONE --> OUTPUT[Final Output]
```

## Related

- [Molecules](../concepts/molecules.md) -- How molecules track multi-step workflows and provide crash recovery
- [Gates](../concepts/gates.md) -- Async coordination primitives used within formula steps
- [Code Review Workflow](code-review.md) -- The convoy formula for parallel multi-perspective code review
- [MEOW Stack](../concepts/meow-stack.md) -- The layered abstraction model from molecules to full orchestration

### Blog Posts

- [Building Your First Custom Formula](/blog/custom-formulas) -- Step-by-step guide to creating TOML formulas for custom agent workflows
- [Advanced Convoy Orchestration Patterns](/blog/advanced-convoy-patterns) -- Cross-rig tracking, dependency chains, and parallel fan-out for convoy formulas
- [Work Distribution Patterns](/blog/work-distribution-patterns) -- Decision framework comparing formula workflows with manual convoys and Mayor orchestration
- [Formula Design Patterns for Gas Town](/blog/formula-design-patterns) -- Reusable patterns for structuring TOML formulas with steps, gates, and variable templating
- [Molecules and Formulas: Gas Town's Workflow Engine](/blog/molecules-and-formulas) -- How molecules power the formula workflow engine
