docs/guides/multi-runtime.md, before:

---
title: "Multi-Runtime Support"
sidebar_position: 3
description: "Configure and mix multiple AI coding agents including Claude Code, Gemini CLI, Codex, and Cursor within Gas Town."
---

# Multi-Runtime Support

Gas Town is not locked to a single AI coding agent. While Claude Code is the default and most thoroughly supported runtime, Gas Town supports multiple agent runtimes -- allowing you to mix and match based on task requirements, cost, or preference.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    GT[Gas Town Orchestrator] -->|default| CLAUDE[Claude Code]
    GT -->|--agent gemini| GEMINI[Gemini CLI]
    GT -->|--agent codex| CODEX[Codex]
    GT -->|--agent cursor| CURSOR[Cursor]
    GT -->|--agent auggie| AUGGIE[Augment]
    GT -->|--agent amp| AMP[Amp]
    CLAUDE & GEMINI & CODEX & CURSOR & AUGGIE & AMP --> HOOK[gt hook / gt done / gt mail]
```

---

## Supported Runtimes

| Runtime | CLI Command | Provider | Hook Support | Prompt Mode |
|---------|-------------|----------|-------------|-------------|
| **Claude Code** | `claude` | Anthropic | Full | CLAUDE.md |
| **Gemini CLI** | `gemini` | Google | Partial | GEMINI.md / prompt injection |
| **Codex** | `codex` | OpenAI | Partial | AGENTS.md / prompt injection |
| **Cursor** | `cursor` | Cursor | Limited | .cursorrules |
| **Auggie** | `auggie` | Augment | Limited | Prompt injection |
| **Amp** | `amp` | Sourcegraph | Limited | Prompt injection |

### Runtime Capabilities

| Capability | Claude | Gemini | Codex | Cursor | Auggie | Amp |
|-----------|--------|--------|-------|--------|--------|-----|
| Session hooks (startup/shutdown) | Yes | Partial | Partial | No | No | No |
| File-based context (CLAUDE.md) | Yes | Via adapter | Via adapter | Via .cursorrules | No | No |
| Mail integration | Yes | Yes | Yes | Limited | Limited | Limited |
| Nudge support | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No | No |
| `gt done` integration | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `gt prime` support | Yes | Yes | Yes | Partial | Partial | Partial |

---

## Configuration

### Default Runtime

Set the default runtime for the entire town:

```bash
gt config default-agent claude
```

This applies to all new polecats unless overridden at the rig or sling level.

### Per-Rig Configuration

Each rig can specify its own default runtime in `settings/config.json`:

```json
{
  "rigs": {
    "myproject": {
      "default_agent": "claude",
      "agent_config": {
        "claude": {
          "model": "opus",
          "max_tokens": 200000
        }
      }
    },
    "ml-pipeline": {
      "default_agent": "gemini",
      "agent_config": {
        "gemini": {
          "model": "2.5-pro"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Per-Agent Configuration

```bash
# Set the runtime for a specific agent type
gt config agent set gemini "gemini"
gt config agent set codex "codex"

# Get current agent configuration
gt config agent get claude
```

---

## Using `--agent` with Sling

Override the runtime when slinging work to a polecat:

```bash
# Default runtime
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject

# Specify a runtime
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent gemini
gt sling gt-d3e4f myproject --agent codex
gt sling gt-g5h6i myproject --agent claude
```

This spawns the polecat using the specified runtime instead of the rig or town default.

:::tip[When to Mix Runtimes]

- Use **Claude** for complex architectural work requiring deep reasoning
- Use **Gemini** for tasks involving large context windows or Google ecosystem integration
- Use **Codex** for rapid prototyping or OpenAI-ecosystem projects
- Use **Cursor** when you need tight IDE integration for a specific task

:::

---

## Runtime-Specific Considerations

### Claude Code (Default)

Claude Code has the deepest Gas Town integration:

- **Startup hooks:** Claude reads CLAUDE.md automatically on session start, giving it full Gas Town context
- **Session persistence:** Supports long-running sessions with context compaction
- **Native commands:** `gt prime`, `gt hook`, `gt done` work natively within Claude sessions
- **Prompt mode:** CLAUDE.md files in the project root and agent directories

```bash
# No special configuration needed
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent claude
```

### Gemini CLI

Gemini CLI integration uses adapters to bridge Gas Town's hook system:

- **Startup hooks:** Partial support via GEMINI.md adapter files
- **Context injection:** Gas Town generates a GEMINI.md context file that Gemini reads on startup
- **Prompt mode:** Supports both file-based context and prompt injection

```bash
# Configure Gemini
gt config agent set gemini "gemini"

# The adapter creates a GEMINI.md alongside CLAUDE.md
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent gemini
```

### Codex

OpenAI's Codex CLI integration:

- **Startup hooks:** Partial support via AGENTS.md adapter
- **Context injection:** Gas Town writes AGENTS.md files for Codex to read
- **Prompt mode:** Supports file-based context via AGENTS.md

```bash
gt config agent set codex "codex"
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent codex
```

### Cursor

Cursor agent operates differently from CLI-based agents:

- **No startup hooks:** Cursor does not read startup hooks in the same way
- **Context via .cursorrules:** Gas Town generates .cursorrules files with context
- **Limited nudge support:** Cursor sessions cannot receive real-time nudges

```bash
gt config agent set cursor "cursor"
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent cursor
```

:::warning[Cursor Limitations]

Cursor runs as an IDE extension, not a standalone CLI process. Gas Town's tmux-based session management has limited visibility into Cursor sessions. Health monitoring and nudge support are constrained.

:::

### Auggie and Amp

These runtimes have more limited Gas Town integration:

- **No native hook support:** Context must be injected manually
- **Prompt injection mode:** Gas Town prepends context to the agent's initial prompt
- **Limited monitoring:** Witness health checks have reduced coverage

```bash
gt config agent set auggie "auggie"
gt config agent set amp "amp"
```

---

## Startup Fallback for Hook-Limited Runtimes

Runtimes without full hook support (Cursor, Auggie, Amp) require a startup fallback to ensure agents receive their context and work assignments.

### `gt prime` -- Manual Context Injection

After spawning an agent with a hook-limited runtime, manually inject context:

```bash
# In the agent's terminal/session
gt prime
```

This reads all relevant context (hooks, beads, mail, agent identity) and presents it as a structured prompt that the agent can process.

### `gt mail inbox` -- Check Pending Mail

For runtimes that support text input but not file-based hooks, check for pending messages after priming:

```bash
gt mail inbox
```

This shows all pending messages in the agent's mailbox. Read any relevant messages with `gt mail read <id>` to get assignment context.

### Recommended Startup Sequence for Limited Runtimes

```bash
# 1. Spawn the polecat
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent auggie

# 2. Attach to the session
gt session at <name> --rig myproject

# 3. Inject context
gt prime

# 4. Check pending mail
gt mail inbox

# 5. The agent now has full context and can begin work
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant You
    participant GT as gt sling
    participant Session as Agent Session
    participant Agent as Limited Runtime

    You->>GT: gt sling --agent auggie
    GT->>Session: Spawn polecat
    You->>Session: gt session at <name>
    You->>Agent: gt prime (inject context)
    Agent->>Agent: Read hook + bead
    You->>Agent: gt mail inbox
    Agent->>Agent: Begin work
```

:::note

For Claude Code and Gemini, this manual process is not necessary -- hooks handle context injection automatically.

:::

---

:::warning[Runtime Switching Mid-Task]
Avoid switching runtimes for the same bead mid-implementation. If a polecat running on Claude Code gets stuck and you release the bead to re-sling with Gemini, the new polecat may interpret the existing partial work differently, leading to inconsistent implementation or duplicated effort. When switching runtimes mid-task, add detailed handoff notes to the bead explaining what the previous attempt accomplished.
:::

## Runtime Selection Decision Tree

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    TASK{What kind of task?}
    TASK -->|Complex reasoning / refactor| CLAUDE[Use Claude Code]
    TASK -->|Large context window| GEMINI[Use Gemini CLI]
    TASK -->|Rapid prototyping| CODEX[Use Codex]
    TASK -->|IDE-integrated editing| CURSOR[Use Cursor]
    CLAUDE --> SLING["gt sling --agent claude"]
    GEMINI --> SLING2["gt sling --agent gemini"]
    CODEX --> SLING3["gt sling --agent codex"]
    CURSOR --> SLING4["gt sling --agent cursor"]
    SLING & SLING2 & SLING3 & SLING4 --> REFINERY[Refinery merges<br/>runtime-agnostic]
```

The following diagram shows how hook support degrades across runtimes and what fallback mechanisms are needed:

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> FullHooks: Claude Code
    [*] --> PartialHooks: Gemini / Codex
    [*] --> NoHooks: Cursor / Auggie / Amp
    FullHooks --> AutoContext: CLAUDE.md read on startup
    PartialHooks --> AdapterContext: Adapter file generated
    NoHooks --> ManualContext: gt prime required
    AutoContext --> Working: Agent begins work
    AdapterContext --> Working
    ManualContext --> Working
```

## Mixing Runtimes in a Single Rig

You can have polecats running different runtimes in the same rig simultaneously:

```bash
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent claude    # Complex refactor
gt sling gt-d3e4f myproject --agent gemini    # Documentation update
gt sling gt-g5h6i myproject --agent codex     # Quick bug fix
```

All three polecats work in separate git worktrees within the same rig, and all submit MRs to the same Refinery for merge.

:::warning[Merge Queue is Runtime-Agnostic]

The Refinery does not know or care which runtime produced the code. It validates and merges based on tests and conflict resolution, regardless of which AI wrote the code.

:::

---

## Configuration Reference

### Town-Level (`settings/config.json`)

```json
{
  "default_agent": "claude",
  "agents": {
    "claude": {
      "command": "claude",
      "model": "opus",
      "context_file": "CLAUDE.md",
      "hooks_supported": true
    },
    "gemini": {
      "command": "gemini",
      "model": "2.5-pro",
      "context_file": "GEMINI.md",
      "hooks_supported": "partial",
      "adapter": "gemini-adapter"
    },
    "codex": {
      "command": "codex",
      "context_file": "AGENTS.md",
      "hooks_supported": "partial",
      "adapter": "codex-adapter"
    },
    "cursor": {
      "command": "cursor",
      "context_file": ".cursorrules",
      "hooks_supported": false,
      "startup_fallback": true
    },
    "auggie": {
      "command": "auggie",
      "hooks_supported": false,
      "startup_fallback": true,
      "prompt_injection": true
    },
    "amp": {
      "command": "amp",
      "hooks_supported": false,
      "startup_fallback": true,
      "prompt_injection": true
    }
  }
}
```

### Per-Rig Override

```json
{
  "default_agent": "gemini",
  "agent_overrides": {
    "max_polecats": 5,
    "preferred_runtimes": ["gemini", "claude"]
  }
}
```

---

:::danger

Switching a rig's default runtime while polecats are actively working can cause hook deserialization failures. Always run `gt down` on the rig before changing the `default_agent` setting, then restart with `gt start --all`.

:::

## Multi-Runtime Best Practices

1. **Start with Claude Code.** It has the deepest integration and is the most thoroughly tested. Add other runtimes once you are comfortable with the basics.

2. **Use the right runtime for the task.** Claude excels at complex reasoning and multi-step refactors. Gemini handles large contexts well. Match the runtime to the work.

3. **Test runtime compatibility.** Before relying on a new runtime in production, run a test polecat and verify that `gt done`, hook reading, and merge submission all work correctly.

4. **Monitor runtime-specific issues.** Different runtimes have different failure modes. Watch `gt feed` for patterns specific to a runtime.

5. **Keep fallback procedures documented.** If you use hook-limited runtimes, document the startup sequence for your team so everyone knows the manual context injection steps.

## Related

- [Installation](../getting-started/installation.md) -- Supported runtimes and how to configure the default agent
- [Hooks](../concepts/hooks.md) -- How hooks attach work to agents and vary by runtime capability
- [Polecats](../agents/polecats.md) -- Ephemeral workers that can run on any supported runtime
- [Configuration](../cli-reference/configuration.md) -- CLI commands for setting default agents and rig-level overrides

### Blog Posts

- [Multi-Runtime Workflows with Gas Town](/blog/multi-runtime-workflows) -- How Gas Town orchestrates work across Claude Code, Gemini CLI, Codex, and other runtimes
- [Gas Town vs Traditional CI/CD: What's Different?](/blog/gas-town-vs-cicd) -- How Gas Town's agent-driven model complements traditional CI/CD pipelines
- [Hook-Driven Architecture in Gas Town](/blog/hook-driven-architecture) -- How hooks vary by runtime and why full hook support matters for agent autonomy
- [Agent Communication Patterns in Gas Town](/blog/agent-communication-patterns) -- How mail and nudge channels work across different runtimes with varying integration depths

Commit message:

Raise test 37 threshold: doc /blog/ cross-links from 4 to 5

docs/guides/multi-runtime.md, after:

---
title: "Multi-Runtime Support"
sidebar_position: 3
description: "Configure and mix multiple AI coding agents including Claude Code, Gemini CLI, Codex, and Cursor within Gas Town."
---

# Multi-Runtime Support

Gas Town is not locked to a single AI coding agent. While Claude Code is the default and most thoroughly supported runtime, Gas Town supports multiple agent runtimes -- allowing you to mix and match based on task requirements, cost, or preference.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    GT[Gas Town Orchestrator] -->|default| CLAUDE[Claude Code]
    GT -->|--agent gemini| GEMINI[Gemini CLI]
    GT -->|--agent codex| CODEX[Codex]
    GT -->|--agent cursor| CURSOR[Cursor]
    GT -->|--agent auggie| AUGGIE[Augment]
    GT -->|--agent amp| AMP[Amp]
    CLAUDE & GEMINI & CODEX & CURSOR & AUGGIE & AMP --> HOOK[gt hook / gt done / gt mail]
```

---

## Supported Runtimes

| Runtime | CLI Command | Provider | Hook Support | Prompt Mode |
|---------|-------------|----------|-------------|-------------|
| **Claude Code** | `claude` | Anthropic | Full | CLAUDE.md |
| **Gemini CLI** | `gemini` | Google | Partial | GEMINI.md / prompt injection |
| **Codex** | `codex` | OpenAI | Partial | AGENTS.md / prompt injection |
| **Cursor** | `cursor` | Cursor | Limited | .cursorrules |
| **Auggie** | `auggie` | Augment | Limited | Prompt injection |
| **Amp** | `amp` | Sourcegraph | Limited | Prompt injection |

### Runtime Capabilities

| Capability | Claude | Gemini | Codex | Cursor | Auggie | Amp |
|-----------|--------|--------|-------|--------|--------|-----|
| Session hooks (startup/shutdown) | Yes | Partial | Partial | No | No | No |
| File-based context (CLAUDE.md) | Yes | Via adapter | Via adapter | Via .cursorrules | No | No |
| Mail integration | Yes | Yes | Yes | Limited | Limited | Limited |
| Nudge support | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | No | No |
| `gt done` integration | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `gt prime` support | Yes | Yes | Yes | Partial | Partial | Partial |

---

## Configuration

### Default Runtime

Set the default runtime for the entire town:

```bash
gt config default-agent claude
```

This applies to all new polecats unless overridden at the rig or sling level.

### Per-Rig Configuration

Each rig can specify its own default runtime in `settings/config.json`:

```json
{
  "rigs": {
    "myproject": {
      "default_agent": "claude",
      "agent_config": {
        "claude": {
          "model": "opus",
          "max_tokens": 200000
        }
      }
    },
    "ml-pipeline": {
      "default_agent": "gemini",
      "agent_config": {
        "gemini": {
          "model": "2.5-pro"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Per-Agent Configuration

```bash
# Set the runtime for a specific agent type
gt config agent set gemini "gemini"
gt config agent set codex "codex"

# Get current agent configuration
gt config agent get claude
```

---

## Using `--agent` with Sling

Override the runtime when slinging work to a polecat:

```bash
# Default runtime
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject

# Specify a runtime
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent gemini
gt sling gt-d3e4f myproject --agent codex
gt sling gt-g5h6i myproject --agent claude
```

This spawns the polecat using the specified runtime instead of the rig or town default.

:::tip[When to Mix Runtimes]

- Use **Claude** for complex architectural work requiring deep reasoning
- Use **Gemini** for tasks involving large context windows or Google ecosystem integration
- Use **Codex** for rapid prototyping or OpenAI-ecosystem projects
- Use **Cursor** when you need tight IDE integration for a specific task

:::

---

## Runtime-Specific Considerations

### Claude Code (Default)

Claude Code has the deepest Gas Town integration:

- **Startup hooks:** Claude reads CLAUDE.md automatically on session start, giving it full Gas Town context
- **Session persistence:** Supports long-running sessions with context compaction
- **Native commands:** `gt prime`, `gt hook`, `gt done` work natively within Claude sessions
- **Prompt mode:** CLAUDE.md files in the project root and agent directories

```bash
# No special configuration needed
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent claude
```

### Gemini CLI

Gemini CLI integration uses adapters to bridge Gas Town's hook system:

- **Startup hooks:** Partial support via GEMINI.md adapter files
- **Context injection:** Gas Town generates a GEMINI.md context file that Gemini reads on startup
- **Prompt mode:** Supports both file-based context and prompt injection

```bash
# Configure Gemini
gt config agent set gemini "gemini"

# The adapter creates a GEMINI.md alongside CLAUDE.md
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent gemini
```

### Codex

OpenAI's Codex CLI integration:

- **Startup hooks:** Partial support via AGENTS.md adapter
- **Context injection:** Gas Town writes AGENTS.md files for Codex to read
- **Prompt mode:** Supports file-based context via AGENTS.md

```bash
gt config agent set codex "codex"
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent codex
```

### Cursor

Cursor agent operates differently from CLI-based agents:

- **No startup hooks:** Cursor does not read startup hooks in the same way
- **Context via .cursorrules:** Gas Town generates .cursorrules files with context
- **Limited nudge support:** Cursor sessions cannot receive real-time nudges

```bash
gt config agent set cursor "cursor"
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent cursor
```

:::warning[Cursor Limitations]

Cursor runs as an IDE extension, not a standalone CLI process. Gas Town's tmux-based session management has limited visibility into Cursor sessions. Health monitoring and nudge support are constrained.

:::

### Auggie and Amp

These runtimes have more limited Gas Town integration:

- **No native hook support:** Context must be injected manually
- **Prompt injection mode:** Gas Town prepends context to the agent's initial prompt
- **Limited monitoring:** Witness health checks have reduced coverage

```bash
gt config agent set auggie "auggie"
gt config agent set amp "amp"
```

---

## Startup Fallback for Hook-Limited Runtimes

Runtimes without full hook support (Cursor, Auggie, Amp) require a startup fallback to ensure agents receive their context and work assignments.

### `gt prime` -- Manual Context Injection

After spawning an agent with a hook-limited runtime, manually inject context:

```bash
# In the agent's terminal/session
gt prime
```

This reads all relevant context (hooks, beads, mail, agent identity) and presents it as a structured prompt that the agent can process.

### `gt mail inbox` -- Check Pending Mail

For runtimes that support text input but not file-based hooks, check for pending messages after priming:

```bash
gt mail inbox
```

This shows all pending messages in the agent's mailbox. Read any relevant messages with `gt mail read <id>` to get assignment context.

### Recommended Startup Sequence for Limited Runtimes

```bash
# 1. Spawn the polecat
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent auggie

# 2. Attach to the session
gt session at <name> --rig myproject

# 3. Inject context
gt prime

# 4. Check pending mail
gt mail inbox

# 5. The agent now has full context and can begin work
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant You
    participant GT as gt sling
    participant Session as Agent Session
    participant Agent as Limited Runtime

    You->>GT: gt sling --agent auggie
    GT->>Session: Spawn polecat
    You->>Session: gt session at <name>
    You->>Agent: gt prime (inject context)
    Agent->>Agent: Read hook + bead
    You->>Agent: gt mail inbox
    Agent->>Agent: Begin work
```

:::note

For Claude Code and Gemini, this manual process is not necessary -- hooks handle context injection automatically.

:::

---

:::warning[Runtime Switching Mid-Task]
Avoid switching runtimes for the same bead mid-implementation. If a polecat running on Claude Code gets stuck and you release the bead to re-sling with Gemini, the new polecat may interpret the existing partial work differently, leading to inconsistent implementation or duplicated effort. When switching runtimes mid-task, add detailed handoff notes to the bead explaining what the previous attempt accomplished. For cross-runtime communication patterns, see [Agent Communication Patterns in Gas Town](/blog/agent-communication-patterns).
:::

## Runtime Selection Decision Tree

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    TASK{What kind of task?}
    TASK -->|Complex reasoning / refactor| CLAUDE[Use Claude Code]
    TASK -->|Large context window| GEMINI[Use Gemini CLI]
    TASK -->|Rapid prototyping| CODEX[Use Codex]
    TASK -->|IDE-integrated editing| CURSOR[Use Cursor]
    CLAUDE --> SLING["gt sling --agent claude"]
    GEMINI --> SLING2["gt sling --agent gemini"]
    CODEX --> SLING3["gt sling --agent codex"]
    CURSOR --> SLING4["gt sling --agent cursor"]
    SLING & SLING2 & SLING3 & SLING4 --> REFINERY[Refinery merges<br/>runtime-agnostic]
```

The following diagram shows how hook support degrades across runtimes and what fallback mechanisms are needed:

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> FullHooks: Claude Code
    [*] --> PartialHooks: Gemini / Codex
    [*] --> NoHooks: Cursor / Auggie / Amp
    FullHooks --> AutoContext: CLAUDE.md read on startup
    PartialHooks --> AdapterContext: Adapter file generated
    NoHooks --> ManualContext: gt prime required
    AutoContext --> Working: Agent begins work
    AdapterContext --> Working
    ManualContext --> Working
```

## Mixing Runtimes in a Single Rig

You can have polecats running different runtimes in the same rig simultaneously:

```bash
gt sling gt-a1b2c myproject --agent claude    # Complex refactor
gt sling gt-d3e4f myproject --agent gemini    # Documentation update
gt sling gt-g5h6i myproject --agent codex     # Quick bug fix
```

All three polecats work in separate git worktrees within the same rig, and all submit MRs to the same Refinery for merge.

:::warning[Merge Queue is Runtime-Agnostic]

The Refinery does not know or care which runtime produced the code. It validates and merges based on tests and conflict resolution, regardless of which AI wrote the code.

:::

---

## Configuration Reference

### Town-Level (`settings/config.json`)

```json
{
  "default_agent": "claude",
  "agents": {
    "claude": {
      "command": "claude",
      "model": "opus",
      "context_file": "CLAUDE.md",
      "hooks_supported": true
    },
    "gemini": {
      "command": "gemini",
      "model": "2.5-pro",
      "context_file": "GEMINI.md",
      "hooks_supported": "partial",
      "adapter": "gemini-adapter"
    },
    "codex": {
      "command": "codex",
      "context_file": "AGENTS.md",
      "hooks_supported": "partial",
      "adapter": "codex-adapter"
    },
    "cursor": {
      "command": "cursor",
      "context_file": ".cursorrules",
      "hooks_supported": false,
      "startup_fallback": true
    },
    "auggie": {
      "command": "auggie",
      "hooks_supported": false,
      "startup_fallback": true,
      "prompt_injection": true
    },
    "amp": {
      "command": "amp",
      "hooks_supported": false,
      "startup_fallback": true,
      "prompt_injection": true
    }
  }
}
```

### Per-Rig Override

```json
{
  "default_agent": "gemini",
  "agent_overrides": {
    "max_polecats": 5,
    "preferred_runtimes": ["gemini", "claude"]
  }
}
```

---

:::danger

Switching a rig's default runtime while polecats are actively working can cause hook deserialization failures. Always run `gt down` on the rig before changing the `default_agent` setting, then restart with `gt start --all`.

:::

## Multi-Runtime Best Practices

1. **Start with Claude Code.** It has the deepest integration and is the most thoroughly tested. Add other runtimes once you are comfortable with the basics.

2. **Use the right runtime for the task.** Claude excels at complex reasoning and multi-step refactors. Gemini handles large contexts well. Match the runtime to the work.

3. **Test runtime compatibility.** Before relying on a new runtime in production, run a test polecat and verify that `gt done`, hook reading, and merge submission all work correctly.

4. **Monitor runtime-specific issues.** Different runtimes have different failure modes. Watch `gt feed` for patterns specific to a runtime.

5. **Keep fallback procedures documented.** If you use hook-limited runtimes, document the startup sequence for your team so everyone knows the manual context injection steps.

## Related

- [Installation](../getting-started/installation.md) -- Supported runtimes and how to configure the default agent
- [Hooks](../concepts/hooks.md) -- How hooks attach work to agents and vary by runtime capability
- [Polecats](../agents/polecats.md) -- Ephemeral workers that can run on any supported runtime
- [Configuration](../cli-reference/configuration.md) -- CLI commands for setting default agents and rig-level overrides

### Blog Posts

- [Multi-Runtime Workflows with Gas Town](/blog/multi-runtime-workflows) -- How Gas Town orchestrates work across Claude Code, Gemini CLI, Codex, and other runtimes
- [Gas Town vs Traditional CI/CD: What's Different?](/blog/gas-town-vs-cicd) -- How Gas Town's agent-driven model complements traditional CI/CD pipelines
- [Hook-Driven Architecture in Gas Town](/blog/hook-driven-architecture) -- How hooks vary by runtime and why full hook support matters for agent autonomy
- [Agent Communication Patterns in Gas Town](/blog/agent-communication-patterns) -- How mail and nudge channels work across different runtimes with varying integration depths
