docs/guides/troubleshooting.md, before:

---
title: "Troubleshooting"
sidebar_position: 8
description: "Solutions for the most common Gas Town problems: gt done failures, polecat churn, branch naming, bead routing, hook conflicts, and stuck refineries."
---

# Troubleshooting

This guide covers the most frequently encountered Gas Town problems and their solutions. For a comprehensive reference of all troubleshooting topics, see [Operations: Troubleshooting](../operations/troubleshooting.md).

---

## `gt done` Fails: "Not Inside a Rig Directory"

**Symptom:** A polecat finishes its work, runs `gt done`, and gets:

```
Error: not inside a rig directory
```

This happens regardless of which directory you run the command from -- worktree, polecat root, rig root, or town root.

**Cause:** `gt done` infers the rig from the current working directory. In some configurations (particularly polecat worktrees nested under `polecats/<name>/`), the directory detection fails to resolve to a valid rig path.

**Workaround:**

1. **Ensure your work is committed and pushed first:**

    ```bash
    git status              # Verify clean
    git push origin HEAD    # Push the branch
    ```

2. **Notify the Witness manually:**

    ```bash
    gt mail send <rig>/witness -s "DONE: <bead-id>" -m "Work complete. Branch pushed. gt done fails (bug ga-w8vv)."
    ```

3. **Escalate if needed:**

    ```bash
    gt escalate "gt done fails: not inside rig directory" -s medium --related <bead-id>
    ```

The Witness will handle merge queue submission and polecat cleanup on your behalf.

:::note

This is a known issue tracked as **ga-w8vv**. Until it is fixed, the workaround above is the standard procedure for polecats that hit this error.

:::

---

## Polecat Churn Cycle

**Symptom:** A polecat spawns, crashes or fails quickly, gets cleaned up by the Witness, the work is re-slung to a new polecat, which also fails -- creating a loop of spawn-fail-respawn.

**Cause:** Usually one of:

- The bead describes work that is fundamentally impossible (missing dependency, invalid API, nonexistent file)
- The test suite is broken on `main`, so every polecat fails preflight
- The codebase has a configuration issue that prevents any agent from working
- A merge conflict keeps reoccurring because the underlying problem is not resolved

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check recent polecat activity for a pattern
gt trail --since 1h

# Look at the bead's history -- has it been slung multiple times?
bd show <bead-id>

# Check if main is green
cd <rig>/refinery/rig
git checkout main && npm test   # or your project's test command
```

**Solutions:**

1. **Break the cycle by releasing the bead:**

    ```bash
    gt release <bead-id>
    ```

    This unhooks the bead and stops it from being automatically re-slung.

2. **Fix the root cause before re-slinging.** If `main` is broken, fix it first. If the bead is impossible, update or close it:

    ```bash
    bd update <bead-id> --description "Updated requirements: ..."
    # or
    bd close <bead-id> --reason "Not feasible: <explanation>"
    ```

3. **Check for a systemic issue:**

    ```bash
    gt doctor
    bd list --status=in_progress   # Look for beads that keep cycling
    ```

:::tip

If you see the same bead ID appearing repeatedly in `gt trail`, that is a churn cycle. The bead is the problem, not the polecats.

:::

---

## `origin/main` vs `origin/master`

**Symptom:** Git commands fail with errors like:

```
fatal: couldn't find remote ref main
```

or polecats push to the wrong branch.

**Cause:** Some repositories use `main` as the default branch, others use `master`. Gas Town defaults to `main` but the remote repository may use `master`.

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check what the remote default branch is
git remote show origin | grep "HEAD branch"

# Check what branches exist
git branch -r
```

**Solutions:**

1. **Verify the remote default branch and use it consistently:**

    ```bash
    # If the remote uses master
    git branch -r | grep origin/master
    git branch -r | grep origin/main
    ```

2. **Set the rig's default branch in configuration** if it differs from `main`:

    ```bash
    # Check current rig configuration
    gt rig show <rig>
    ```

3. **For polecats that encounter this mid-work:** adjust the target branch in your git commands:

    ```bash
    # If origin/master is the correct target
    git rebase origin/master
    git push origin HEAD
    ```

:::warning

The Refinery merges to the repository's default branch. If there is a mismatch between what agents assume (`main`) and what the remote uses (`master`), merges will fail silently or target the wrong branch. Verify this during rig setup.

:::

---

## Bead Routing: Town vs Rig

**Symptom:** `bd show <id>` returns "not found" even though you know the bead exists, or `bd create` puts the bead in the wrong database.

**Cause:** Beads exist at two levels with different prefixes:

| Level | Location | Prefix | Example |
|-------|----------|--------|---------|
| **Town** | `~/gt/.beads/` | `hq-*` | `hq-abc123` |
| **Rig** | `<rig>/.beads/` | Per-rig | `ga-xyz789` (gastowndocs) |

The `bd` CLI routes based on the prefix in the bead ID. If you use the wrong prefix or are in the wrong directory, the command routes to the wrong database.

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check routing rules
cat ~/gt/.beads/routes.jsonl

# Debug routing for a specific bead
BD_DEBUG_ROUTING=1 bd show <bead-id>
```

**Solutions:**

1. **Use the correct prefix.** Every rig has a unique prefix. Check yours:

    ```bash
    bd list   # Shows beads in the current rig's database
    ```

2. **Route explicitly with `--rig`:**

    ```bash
    bd show <bead-id> --rig gastowndocs     # Force rig-level lookup
    bd create --rig gastown --title "..."    # Create in a specific rig
    ```

3. **File in the right place.** The rule: file the bead in the rig that **owns the code** where the fix would be committed.

    | Issue is about... | File in |
    |-------------------|---------|
    | This rig's code | Default (current rig) |
    | `bd` CLI bugs | `beads` rig |
    | `gt` CLI bugs | `gastown` rig |
    | Cross-rig coordination | Town level (`hq-*`) |

---

## Hook Slot Failures

**Symptom:** `gt sling` fails with an error about hooks, or a polecat starts but finds nothing on its hook.

**Common errors:**

```
hook already attached
```

```
no work on hook
```

**Cause:** Hooks are persistent pointers from an agent to its current bead. Hook conflicts happen when:

- A previous polecat crashed without releasing its hook
- A bead is already hooked to another agent
- The hook file was corrupted during an unclean shutdown

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check what's on the hook
gt hook

# Check hooks across a rig
gt hook --agent <polecat> --rig <rig>
```

**Solutions:**

1. **"hook already attached"** -- Release the stale hook first:

    ```bash
    gt release <bead-id>

    # Then re-sling
    gt sling <bead-id> <rig>
    ```

2. **"no work on hook"** -- The polecat was spawned but work was not attached:

    ```bash
    # Check if mail contains the assignment
    gt mail inbox

    # If mail has the work, hook it manually
    gt mol attach-from-mail <mail-id>

    # If no mail either, escalate to Witness
    gt mail send <rig>/witness -s "HELP: empty hook" -m "Polecat spawned with no work"
    ```

3. **Corrupted hook state** -- If the hook seems wrong or inconsistent:

    ```bash
    # Let the Witness clean up
    gt mail send <rig>/witness -s "Hook state inconsistent" -m "Details..."

    # Or if you have direct access, check the hook file
    ls -la <rig>/polecats/<name>/.hook*
    ```

:::tip

Hooks survive crashes -- that is their purpose. If a polecat crashes, the Witness detects the zombie, cleans up, and the hook persists for the next polecat. You should rarely need to manually manage hooks.

:::

---

## Refinery Stuck Merges

**Symptom:** The merge queue has items but nothing is being merged. `gt refinery queue` shows pending MRs but none are progressing.

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check Refinery status
gt refinery status <rig>

# Check the merge queue
gt refinery queue <rig>

# Check for blocked MRs
gt refinery blocked <rig>

# Check Refinery session health
gt peek refinery --rig <rig>
```

**Common causes and solutions:**

### 1. Refinery Session Crashed

The Refinery agent may have crashed or lost context.

```bash
# Restart it
gt refinery restart <rig>
```

### 2. Merge Conflict in the First MR

The Refinery processes MRs strictly in order. If the first MR has an unresolvable conflict, it blocks everything behind it.

```bash
# Check what's at the head of the queue
gt refinery queue <rig>

# If the first MR is stuck on conflicts, skip it
gt refinery release <mr-id>

# Re-sling the problematic bead for a fresh attempt
gt sling <bead-id> <rig>
```

### 3. Validation Failures

Tests or linting fail during the Refinery's validation step.

```bash
# Attach to the Refinery to see what happened
gt refinery attach <rig>

# Check if main itself is broken
cd <rig>/refinery/rig
git pull origin main
npm test   # or your project's test command
```

If `main` is broken, fix it first -- no MR can pass validation against a broken `main`.

### 4. Stale Claim

An MR was claimed by a Refinery worker that crashed before completing.

```bash
# Check for unclaimed MRs
gt refinery unclaimed <rig>

# Release the stale claim
gt refinery release <mr-id>
```

:::note

The Refinery merges MRs **one at a time**, rebasing each onto the latest `main`. This is intentional -- it prevents race conditions. If your queue is backing up, the bottleneck is usually validation speed (test suite runtime) or unresolved conflicts.

:::

---

## Quick Diagnostic Reference

| Problem | First Command |
|---------|---------------|
| General health check | `gt doctor` |
| Something not running | `gt rig list` |
| Work not progressing | `gt trail --since 1h` |
| Polecat issues | `gt polecat list <rig>` |
| Merge queue stuck | `gt refinery queue <rig>` |
| Bead not found | `BD_DEBUG_ROUTING=1 bd show <id>` |
| Agent unresponsive | `gt peek <agent>` |
| Open escalations | `gt escalate list` |

For the full troubleshooting reference, see [Operations: Troubleshooting](../operations/troubleshooting.md).

Commit message:

docs: clarify gt dashboard is local-only, add troubleshooting for gt.villamarket.ai timeout
Add notes explaining that gt dashboard runs a local web server only and
there is no hosted service at gt.villamarket.ai. Added troubleshooting
entry for users who encounter the timeout when trying to access the
non-existent hosted dashboard.

Fixes ga-uv4i

docs/guides/troubleshooting.md, after:

---
title: "Troubleshooting"
sidebar_position: 8
description: "Solutions for the most common Gas Town problems: gt done failures, polecat churn, branch naming, bead routing, hook conflicts, and stuck refineries."
---

# Troubleshooting

This guide covers the most frequently encountered Gas Town problems and their solutions. For a comprehensive reference of all troubleshooting topics, see [Operations: Troubleshooting](../operations/troubleshooting.md).

---

## Dashboard URL `gt.villamarket.ai` Times Out

**Symptom:** Attempting to access `https://gt.villamarket.ai` results in a timeout (curl exit code 28).

**Cause:** There is no hosted dashboard at `gt.villamarket.ai`. The `gt dashboard` command starts a **local** web server on your machine, not a cloud service.

**Solution:**

Run the dashboard locally:

```bash
# Start the local dashboard
gt dashboard

# Or with a custom port
gt dashboard --port 9000
```

Then access it at `http://localhost:8420` (or your custom port).

:::note

The dashboard is only available while the `gt dashboard` command is running. It is not a persistent hosted service.

:::

---

## `gt done` Fails: "Not Inside a Rig Directory"

**Symptom:** A polecat finishes its work, runs `gt done`, and gets:

```
Error: not inside a rig directory
```

This happens regardless of which directory you run the command from -- worktree, polecat root, rig root, or town root.

**Cause:** `gt done` infers the rig from the current working directory. In some configurations (particularly polecat worktrees nested under `polecats/<name>/`), the directory detection fails to resolve to a valid rig path.

**Workaround:**

1. **Ensure your work is committed and pushed first:**

    ```bash
    git status              # Verify clean
    git push origin HEAD    # Push the branch
    ```

2. **Notify the Witness manually:**

    ```bash
    gt mail send <rig>/witness -s "DONE: <bead-id>" -m "Work complete. Branch pushed. gt done fails (bug ga-w8vv)."
    ```

3. **Escalate if needed:**

    ```bash
    gt escalate "gt done fails: not inside rig directory" -s medium --related <bead-id>
    ```

The Witness will handle merge queue submission and polecat cleanup on your behalf.

:::note

This is a known issue tracked as **ga-w8vv**. Until it is fixed, the workaround above is the standard procedure for polecats that hit this error.

:::

---

## Polecat Churn Cycle

**Symptom:** A polecat spawns, crashes or fails quickly, gets cleaned up by the Witness, the work is re-slung to a new polecat, which also fails -- creating a loop of spawn-fail-respawn.

**Cause:** Usually one of:

- The bead describes work that is fundamentally impossible (missing dependency, invalid API, nonexistent file)
- The test suite is broken on `main`, so every polecat fails preflight
- The codebase has a configuration issue that prevents any agent from working
- A merge conflict keeps reoccurring because the underlying problem is not resolved

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check recent polecat activity for a pattern
gt trail --since 1h

# Look at the bead's history -- has it been slung multiple times?
bd show <bead-id>

# Check if main is green
cd <rig>/refinery/rig
git checkout main && npm test   # or your project's test command
```

**Solutions:**

1. **Break the cycle by releasing the bead:**

    ```bash
    gt release <bead-id>
    ```

    This unhooks the bead and stops it from being automatically re-slung.

2. **Fix the root cause before re-slinging.** If `main` is broken, fix it first. If the bead is impossible, update or close it:

    ```bash
    bd update <bead-id> --description "Updated requirements: ..."
    # or
    bd close <bead-id> --reason "Not feasible: <explanation>"
    ```

3. **Check for a systemic issue:**

    ```bash
    gt doctor
    bd list --status=in_progress   # Look for beads that keep cycling
    ```

:::tip

If you see the same bead ID appearing repeatedly in `gt trail`, that is a churn cycle. The bead is the problem, not the polecats.

:::

---

## `origin/main` vs `origin/master`

**Symptom:** Git commands fail with errors like:

```
fatal: couldn't find remote ref main
```

or polecats push to the wrong branch.

**Cause:** Some repositories use `main` as the default branch, others use `master`. Gas Town defaults to `main` but the remote repository may use `master`.

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check what the remote default branch is
git remote show origin | grep "HEAD branch"

# Check what branches exist
git branch -r
```

**Solutions:**

1. **Verify the remote default branch and use it consistently:**

    ```bash
    # If the remote uses master
    git branch -r | grep origin/master
    git branch -r | grep origin/main
    ```

2. **Set the rig's default branch in configuration** if it differs from `main`:

    ```bash
    # Check current rig configuration
    gt rig show <rig>
    ```

3. **For polecats that encounter this mid-work:** adjust the target branch in your git commands:

    ```bash
    # If origin/master is the correct target
    git rebase origin/master
    git push origin HEAD
    ```

:::warning

The Refinery merges to the repository's default branch. If there is a mismatch between what agents assume (`main`) and what the remote uses (`master`), merges will fail silently or target the wrong branch. Verify this during rig setup.

:::

---

## Bead Routing: Town vs Rig

**Symptom:** `bd show <id>` returns "not found" even though you know the bead exists, or `bd create` puts the bead in the wrong database.

**Cause:** Beads exist at two levels with different prefixes:

| Level | Location | Prefix | Example |
|-------|----------|--------|---------|
| **Town** | `~/gt/.beads/` | `hq-*` | `hq-abc123` |
| **Rig** | `<rig>/.beads/` | Per-rig | `ga-xyz789` (gastowndocs) |

The `bd` CLI routes based on the prefix in the bead ID. If you use the wrong prefix or are in the wrong directory, the command routes to the wrong database.

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check routing rules
cat ~/gt/.beads/routes.jsonl

# Debug routing for a specific bead
BD_DEBUG_ROUTING=1 bd show <bead-id>
```

**Solutions:**

1. **Use the correct prefix.** Every rig has a unique prefix. Check yours:

    ```bash
    bd list   # Shows beads in the current rig's database
    ```

2. **Route explicitly with `--rig`:**

    ```bash
    bd show <bead-id> --rig gastowndocs     # Force rig-level lookup
    bd create --rig gastown --title "..."    # Create in a specific rig
    ```

3. **File in the right place.** The rule: file the bead in the rig that **owns the code** where the fix would be committed.

    | Issue is about... | File in |
    |-------------------|---------|
    | This rig's code | Default (current rig) |
    | `bd` CLI bugs | `beads` rig |
    | `gt` CLI bugs | `gastown` rig |
    | Cross-rig coordination | Town level (`hq-*`) |

---

## Hook Slot Failures

**Symptom:** `gt sling` fails with an error about hooks, or a polecat starts but finds nothing on its hook.

**Common errors:**

```
hook already attached
```

```
no work on hook
```

**Cause:** Hooks are persistent pointers from an agent to its current bead. Hook conflicts happen when:

- A previous polecat crashed without releasing its hook
- A bead is already hooked to another agent
- The hook file was corrupted during an unclean shutdown

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check what's on the hook
gt hook

# Check hooks across a rig
gt hook --agent <polecat> --rig <rig>
```

**Solutions:**

1. **"hook already attached"** -- Release the stale hook first:

    ```bash
    gt release <bead-id>

    # Then re-sling
    gt sling <bead-id> <rig>
    ```

2. **"no work on hook"** -- The polecat was spawned but work was not attached:

    ```bash
    # Check if mail contains the assignment
    gt mail inbox

    # If mail has the work, hook it manually
    gt mol attach-from-mail <mail-id>

    # If no mail either, escalate to Witness
    gt mail send <rig>/witness -s "HELP: empty hook" -m "Polecat spawned with no work"
    ```

3. **Corrupted hook state** -- If the hook seems wrong or inconsistent:

    ```bash
    # Let the Witness clean up
    gt mail send <rig>/witness -s "Hook state inconsistent" -m "Details..."

    # Or if you have direct access, check the hook file
    ls -la <rig>/polecats/<name>/.hook*
    ```

:::tip

Hooks survive crashes -- that is their purpose. If a polecat crashes, the Witness detects the zombie, cleans up, and the hook persists for the next polecat. You should rarely need to manually manage hooks.

:::

---

## Refinery Stuck Merges

**Symptom:** The merge queue has items but nothing is being merged. `gt refinery queue` shows pending MRs but none are progressing.

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
# Check Refinery status
gt refinery status <rig>

# Check the merge queue
gt refinery queue <rig>

# Check for blocked MRs
gt refinery blocked <rig>

# Check Refinery session health
gt peek refinery --rig <rig>
```

**Common causes and solutions:**

### 1. Refinery Session Crashed

The Refinery agent may have crashed or lost context.

```bash
# Restart it
gt refinery restart <rig>
```

### 2. Merge Conflict in the First MR

The Refinery processes MRs strictly in order. If the first MR has an unresolvable conflict, it blocks everything behind it.

```bash
# Check what's at the head of the queue
gt refinery queue <rig>

# If the first MR is stuck on conflicts, skip it
gt refinery release <mr-id>

# Re-sling the problematic bead for a fresh attempt
gt sling <bead-id> <rig>
```

### 3. Validation Failures

Tests or linting fail during the Refinery's validation step.

```bash
# Attach to the Refinery to see what happened
gt refinery attach <rig>

# Check if main itself is broken
cd <rig>/refinery/rig
git pull origin main
npm test   # or your project's test command
```

If `main` is broken, fix it first -- no MR can pass validation against a broken `main`.

### 4. Stale Claim

An MR was claimed by a Refinery worker that crashed before completing.

```bash
# Check for unclaimed MRs
gt refinery unclaimed <rig>

# Release the stale claim
gt refinery release <mr-id>
```

:::note

The Refinery merges MRs **one at a time**, rebasing each onto the latest `main`. This is intentional -- it prevents race conditions. If your queue is backing up, the bottleneck is usually validation speed (test suite runtime) or unresolved conflicts.

:::

---

## Quick Diagnostic Reference

| Problem | First Command |
|---------|---------------|
| General health check | `gt doctor` |
| Something not running | `gt rig list` |
| Work not progressing | `gt trail --since 1h` |
| Polecat issues | `gt polecat list <rig>` |
| Merge queue stuck | `gt refinery queue <rig>` |
| Bead not found | `BD_DEBUG_ROUTING=1 bd show <id>` |
| Agent unresponsive | `gt peek <agent>` |
| Open escalations | `gt escalate list` |

For the full troubleshooting reference, see [Operations: Troubleshooting](../operations/troubleshooting.md).
